PART I: INTRODUCTION

The beginnings of wisdom

That human being which, being moved from within to ask, "Who am I?", or "What is the meaning of life?", or other such questions, where the answer sought is not an answer about proximate reality, but rather an answer about ultimate reality, resolves to seek an answer to such questions, has begun the search for wisdom.

The seeker of wisdom will soon learn that so many are the proffered answers to those profound questions which precipitate the search for wisdom, that the problem of answering the questions lies perhaps in lack of time with which one could sort through all the answers to choose the best one, rather than in the impossibility of resolving the questions themselves. And yet, had the questions been answered fully and satisfactorily through the wisdom of bygone ages, why the plurality of beliefs and doctrines, worldviews and dogmas? Why the continuing dialog and search for further answers among the most learned? Why can humanity not agree on the answers?

In the hope of providing more complete answers than those that have as of yet been propounded, the Prophet of Evolution submits the following to the consideration of the honest seeker of wisdom.

On Methods of Viewing the World

The honest seeker will surely want the answers to the most important questions to conform to that which we call "logic." For if the constraint of adhering to logic be removed, there is no possibility of finding a single answer, but any answer may be given and the only way of choosing between them is that which the seeker likes best. But then the seeker is no longer honest but self-interested. True wisdom is not for the self-interested.

Yet logic seems to lack something vital in the search for ultimate truth. For logic is constrained to prove truths based on things previously supposed, which themselves are based on things more basic, etc., etc. And yet one eventually arrives at a place where one cannot find a presupposition that will serve. What can one do then?

One may consider the form of logic called "induction" which arrives at basic principles via observation, which basic principles may then be used to deduce others. And yet, as explained by the famous seeker David Hume, the principle of induction itself is based not on logic but on human habit. How then can one trust in the basic principles derived thereby?

Ask the mathematician, seeker, and you will not be lead astray. The mathematician will show you that no system of logic is complete without the axiom, the initial presupposition that cannot be proven. The mathematician asks one thing, and one thing only, of a set of axioms: that they never lead by any chain of logic, however long or short, to provably contradictory statements. Learn this lesson and learn it well, seeker. May your axioms, your most basic presuppositions, never lead to contradictory statements, and you will have advanced a step on the road to wisdom.

A set of axioms about the existence, and the consequences of those axioms, are what we call a method of viewing the world, or a worldview. Seeker, you are trying to find the correct worldview. Seek not amiss.

On Nature and the Supposed Supernatural 

Consider, seeker, the set of all things that exist. We may call this set "nature." It was once commonplace to call the world observed by ordinary human senses "nature" and to call the world unseen, or seen only by non-ordinary human senses, "supernatural." Yet today we see the world unseen and it is still nature. We analyze the non-ordinary human senses and find that they occur within nature and sense things natural. But these propositions will be dealt with more fully later on. For now, let us simply define nature as that which exists. Then all divine powers which exist are in nature, which reduces their powers not at all but simply follows from the definition of "nature" which we have embraced.

One successful worldview is that which we call "science." This worldview assumes the following:
 - I exist.
 - There is some reality that exists external to me.
 - If I observe something repeatedly, whether in myself or external to myself, this thing becomes more likely to be a rule governing reality, whether in myself or external to myself.

These assumptions are simply the existence of self and non-self, combined with the principle of induction we saw earlier. Remember this, seeker. All worldviews contain unproven assumptions. One's own existence, the existence of external reality, and the principle of induction are the assumptions of science. They are not provable by science; they are simply assumed true.

Many of those who call themselves religious begin from assumptions that are very different. They assume that a certain sacred text is inspired in that it, at least to some extent, accurately describes true reality. Such texts assume the existence of the person, and usually of a God or multiple Gods. Within the nature of the God(s) is written the nature of reality, and it is knowable. Thus the religious person arrives at the foundations of science.

The difficulty comes when science shows that the text cannot be taken as fully true. As an example, consider the Tanakh, the sacred record of the anceint Hebrews, called the Old Testament by the Christians. The Tanakh describes the conquest of the land of Israel by the Hebrews who came from slavery in Egypt, but studies by archaeologists show that this conquest never took place. What, then, for those who ground their ultimate reality in the Tanakh? They must see that it shows a God who, while possessed of humanlike capabilities for anger and other passions, is a rational being. Such a God would not deliberately lie to His chosen people. Whence, then, the stories that point to one reality and the evidence that points to another? Or would God lie? How, then, can one call the Tanakh a reliable source if the God is teaches is one who lies? Such a God may have lied about anything--even His own existence, or rather, may be a group of men masquerading as God, whose existence they have falsely affirmed.

Or might the Tanakh be teaching a symbolic, rather than a literal, truth when it speaks of the conquest of Canaan? But what symbolic truth? And why? And if the conquest of Canaan is only metaphorical, which parts of the Tanakh are truth and which are metaphor, and who decides, and why? Is God Himself only metaphor? These questions are often too difficult for the true believer of the text to bear, and they resort to bad arguments or bad science that seem to confirm that their text is fully truthful. It is thus that one comes to speak of a conflict between "science" and "religion." Let us understand by examining what is meant by religion, beyond simply devotion to a sacred text.

On the Nature and Properties of Religion

Religion is the art of taking a story and making it yours. The seeker who stops there has a personal or informal religion, but the seeker who continues and finds others of like mind, and communes with them, has a group or institutional religion.

Religion is the view that ultimate reality is sacred, and an attempt to find one's way in reference to that sacred ultimate reality.

Religion is the relationship of symbols, narrative, and myth to ethics, especially sexual ethics. It teaches humanity that sexual restraint, and societies based on strong families, confer evolutionary advantages upon their practitioners. In this teaching it is correct for most people. We will look at this more fully later.

Many are the misperceptions regarding religion, seeker. Religion is seen as literal, rather than symbolic or veiled, truth by the majority of its practitioners. Those who see religion as nonliteral often fail to see its deeper functions and call it false or morally dangerous. Such people call themselves secular, which means that to them ultimate reality is not sacred. If anything is sacred at all, and to many secular people nothing is, it is made that way because humans value it and not for any intrinsic reason.



A Religion Based on Truth