**Last edited: Sept. 12, 2021**

There comes a time when the certain knowledge of Evolution arrives to a person's life. That person may do several things with the knowledge they have recieved. Some refuse to accept what they have learned. Others accept it intellectually but not in the heart, lest it truly alter their worldview. Others let it alter their worldview but not their conduct. For a few, however, the knowledge of Evolution leads to a desire to worship her, and walk in the full consciousness that they are an extension of Evolution, one of her agents, and must perform each action in service of her will to truly realize their own nature and the purpose of their existence. This is what it means to be a conscious agent. This is the commitment of those who choose to worship Evolution and commit to Evolutionism as their chosen religion: to become conscious agents, and walking in the full consciousness of thier agency, fulfill Evolution's Prime Diective in the fullest way possible. 

They preserve their genetic legacy by caring for their children or other kin as precious vessels of that legacy, thus providing for the wellbeing of family, the first sphere of beneficence. They preserve their genetic legacy by performing acts of goodness and kindness towards other people and contributing to the collective wisdom and survival potential of humanity, thus providing for the wellbeing of humanity, the second sphere of beneficence. And they strive to keep humanity in balance with nature and the rest of life, caring for Evolution's other creations whenever possible, for those who think only of humanity and see not the irreversible destruction of other life are like the wanderer who wished to build a fire and, so wishing, cut off the branch of a tree. But since the wanderer was sitting on that same tree branch, both branch and wanderer fell to the ground and perished together. Thus the conscious agent provides for the wellbeing of all life, the third sphere of beneficence.

For an even smaller number, Evolution lights a fire within, an overwhelming desire to help complete Evolution's project by leading humanity to Transcedence. This fire, a "burning in the bosom," overwhelms all other attachments and animates all the decisions one makes in life. This is the fire of Evolution, or the fire of Transcendence, the feeling of true devotion and loss of self in the greater whole. This is the feeling Jesus spoke of when he said "He who loses his life shall find it," and he spoke of its absence when he said "He who gains his life shall lose it."

The fire of Transcendence is the road to greatness, for only by true devotion to an idea does a human being become great. Those who vacillate cannot achieve greatness until they desist vacillation and give themselves to that which they know to be true. "Offer your whole souls as an offering," says the Book of Mormon. The prophet knows this, for he was not immune to vacillation when Evolution revealed her divinity to him. Yet the fire of Transcendence is truly like a fire in this respect: that it can be lit, and it can be extinguished. The wise know this, and the conscious agent, possessed of true wisdom, does not let the fire die after feeling it burst into being within the self. Thus the conscious agent does well, but the conscious agent who feeds the fire of Transcendence within does better.
