I worship Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life. She has endowed me with the desire and the capacity to  fulfill her Prime Directive to increase my Survival Potential and preserve my genetic legacy. Through her gifts of reason and intuition I recognize that I fulfill the Prime Directive best when I align the Survival Potential of the three Spheres of Beneficence: family, humanity, and all life, through the Points and Values of the Plan of Progress.

The values:
1) To understand truth
2) To pursue moral goodness
3) To respect all life
4) To love my family and all humanity
5) To seek Transcendence

The points:
1) To understand myself as an evolved being and become a conscious agent of Evolution
2) To pursue the combined wellbeing of the Three Spheres of Beneficence through acts of moral goodness
3) To protect the sacred right of all living beings to fulfill the Prime Directive
4) To participate in the bearing and raising of the next generation
5) To make a contribution toward the Transcendence of humanity and helps others to do the same

The Plan of Progress leads me to the highest moral good, and my efforts to live the Plan of Progress constitute my worship of Evolution.


Use of the Daily meditation to convert to Evolutionism (the Acceptance of Agency ritual)

Body of witnesses: Do you, <full name of convert>, desire to consciously accept your role as an agent of Evolution by declaring your intent to fulfill the Prime Directive and live the Plan of Progress?

Convert: I do.

Body of witnesses: It is well said. First declare your worship of Evolution five times. May the first declaration symbolize your commitment to seek and understand truth as a conscious agent of Evolution.

Convert: I worship Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life.

Body of witnesses: It is well said. May the second declaration symbolize your commitment to seek and perform acts of moral goodness as you align the wellbeing and Survival Potential of your family, humanity, and all life.

Convert: I worship Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life.

Body of witnesses: It is well said. May the third declaration symbolize your commitment to respect all life and allow living beings the opportunity to fulfill the Prime Directive in their own ways.

Convert: I worship Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life.

Body of witnesses: It is well said. May the fourth declaration symbolize your commitment to love your family and all of humanity as you fulfill the Prime Directive, to preserve your genetic legacy by building others up rather than tearing them down.

Convert: I worship Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life.

Body of witnesses: It is well said. May the fifth declaration symbolize your commitment to strive for Transcendence in your profession, personal life, and in all that you do, and to help and encourage others to do the same.

Convert: I worship Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life.

Body of witnesses: It is well said. Finally, declare your commitment to worship Evolution through the Plan of Progress by reciting the daily meditation, which you commit to recite every day throughout your life.

Convert: <Recites the entire daily meditation. Can be read, but memorization is encouraged.>

Body of witnesses: It is well said. Let all present witness this day that <full name of convert> is now a conscious agent of Evolution and is to be welcomed in full fellowship, with the rights, obligations, and benefits of conscious agency.