I. The Prime Directive and the Plan of Progress, Daily Meditation

I worship Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life. She has endowed me with the desire and the capacity to  fulfill her Prime Directive to increase my Survival Potential and preserve my genetic legacy. Through her gifts of reason and intuition I understand that I best fulfill the Prime Directive when I align the wellbeing of the three Spheres of Beneficence: family, humanity, and all life, through the Points and Values of the Plan of Progress.

The values:
1) To understand truth
2) To pursue moral goodness
3) To respect all life
4) To love my family and all humanity
5) To seek Transcendence

The points:
1) To understand myself as an evolved being and become a conscious agent of Evolution
2) To pursue the combined wellbeing of the Three Spheres of Beneficence through acts of moral goodness
3) To protect the sacred right of all living beings to fulfill the Prime Directive
4) To participate in the bearing and raising of the next generation
5) To make a contribution toward the Transcendence of humanity and helps others to do the same

Living the Plan of Progress constitutes my worship of Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life.

II. Big History

First there was a speck. 
Then, an explosion. Chaos.
Then, unorganized matter. Plasma, in flux.
Then, organizaiton. Galaxies, planets.
Then, Earth.
Then, proto-life. RNA, amino acids.
Then, primitive life. Single cells.
Then, complex life. Plants, animals.
Then, humanity. Civilizations.
Finally, there is me.

III. Living the Plan of Progress

Today, how did I understand myself a little better? Did I act consciously to fulfill the Prime Directive and live the Plan of Progress?
This week, how did I understand myself a little better? Did I act consciously to fulfill the Prime Directive and live the Plan of Progress?
What self-knowledge do I lack? How will that knowledge help me to better fulfill the Prime Directive and live the Plan of Progress?

Today, how did I help parents and children in the great labor of bearing and raising the next generation?
This week, how did I help parents and children in the great labor of bearing and raising the next generation?
What more can I do for parents, pregnant women, and children, either my own or those of others, to further the great labor of bearing and raising the next generation?

(Change this with the June 2021 changes to the Plan of Progress)

IV. Meditation for an ordeal

Oh Evolution, you were with me when you gave me the genes of my ancestors, who with little achieved greatness.

Be with me as I remember them and their legacy, which lives on in me through those genes.

May I pass through this ordeal and remember the genes of my ancestors, and achieve greatness.
May I <name the ordeal, using a verb, a conjunction/article, and a noun> and remember the genes of my ancestors, and achieve greatness.
May I remember that this time is but a part of my chance to fulfill the Prime Directive and live the Plan of Progress, and thereby achieve greatness.

V. Meditation to ease the pain of severe loss

Oh Evolution, you were with me when you gave me the genes of my ancestors, who suffered loss, pain, grief, and devastation, and peresevered. 

Be with me as I remember them and their legacy, which lives on in me through those genes.

I have suffered loss. With the genes of my ancestors, may I persevere.
I have suffered pain. With the genes of my ancestors, may I persevere.
I have suffered grief. With the genes of my ancestors, may I persevere.
I have suffered devastation. With the genes of my ancestors, may I persevere.

May I remember that while I yet live, I may yet make a successful effort to fulfill the Prime Directive and live the Plan of Progress, just as my ancestors did. May that effort bring meaning to my life as I suffer pain, grief, loss, and devastation, and persevere.

VI. Meditation on Temptation and Self-Mastery

Temptation springs from dopamine in the mesolimbic pathway seeping unchecked through the neural reward system. Thus the human being is led into errors and follies. Thus the human being desires stimulation, pleasure, and momentary gratification. Thus the human being forgets the consequences of too much stimulation, pleasure, and momentary gratification. Thus the human being forgets the consequences of drinking too much alcohol and brings upon itself misfortune. Thus the human being forgets the consequences of mind-altering drugs and brings upon itself misfortune. Thus the human being forgets the consequences of sexual relations with the spouse of another and brings upon itself misfortune. <If desired> Thus the human being forgets the consequences of <the present temptation> and brings upon itself misfortune. 

Remember, self, that mesolimbic dopamine produces cravings and the promise of a pleasurable reward, but it cannot fulfill that promise. Remember, self, that the promise is an empty one. Remember, self, that Evolution has a purpose in all things, and the purpose of the mesolimbic pathway is to find stimuli that help us fulfill the Prime Directive. But it may be deceived. Keep the mesolimbic pathway to its proper role. Do not let it control you and thereby bring upon yourself misfortune.

VII. Meditation on Alignment of Survival Potential of Family and Humanity

My ancestors knew hardships the likes of which I may never experience. They were ever on the brink of starvation, disease, war, drought, or other plagues. They were forced to cooperate, or die. Yet the same circumstances which necessitated cooperation also circumscribed it. When the tribe is one misfortune away from a disaster that kills half of its members, each individual will do what they can to ensure their children are among the survivors, even if that means to steal the food of another, to kill a jealous rival, or to otherwise harm the group for one's own benefit.

Humanity is no longer on the brink of starvation, disease, war, drought, or other plagues, that may kill half our population. These threats exist but no longer have the potency they once did. And this has important consequences.

Once, stealing the food of another may have meant the survival of my children. Now it means I am likely to go to prison.

Once, killing a jealous rival may have meant the survival of my children. Now it means I am likely to go to prison.

Once, harming the group for my own benefit may have increased my Survival Potential. Now it will decrease it.

When humanity is likely to survive for several generations, the Survival Potential of humanity should be as important as my own survival potential. My efforts to give my children a special advantage will fade away and dissipate with time. But my efforts to increase the Survival Potential of all humanity will last forever, to the benefit of my children and my descendents.

VIII. Meditation on Natural Law as God

What is God?

God is self-existent. "אֶהְיֶה אֲשֶׁר אֶהְיֶה" says YHWH to Moses. "I am that I am." "The way, the truth, and the life," says Jesus. "But of the Word Brahman, there is no end," say the Vedas. 

God has ultimate, binding authority, in the sense of being the ultimate power in the universe. "There is no God but Allah," says the Qur'an. 

Modern science has revealed to us what is self-existent and is the ultimate power in the universe. It is Natural Law. Thus Natural Law is the One God of this universe.

IX. Meditation of Evolution as God

God is THAT WHICH IS WORSHIPPED. And what is entailed by worship? Reverence and obedience. "If you love me, keep my commandments," says Jesus.

God further has moral authority. "God is Love," says John. "Allah is the Oft-Merciful, the Specially Merciful," say the Qur'an.

Natural Law is the One God, but only a subset of Natural Law has direct moral and physical authority over humanity. She binds us to moral laws we cannot escape. That subset is Evolution. Her personality, as worshipped by Evolutionism, is the personification of the abstract, the symbol that invites the hearer to worship her and fulfill her purpose for them, and through them, for all humanity. Evolution deserves our worship on the basis of this moral authority.