Part I.

The law of discipline and self-transcendence

The Prime Directive is:

To preserve and increase your genetic legacy.

The Plan of Progress is:

1) To seek and understand truth
2) To show respect, compassion, and love to all living beings
3) To strive for Transcendence by increasing the survival potential of humanity

What you must know about point 1 is that all truth is not created equal. The most important truth you can understand is that which helps you to live the other points of the Plan of Progress and thereby fulfill the Prime Directive. Truth, fully understood, such that it translates into action by changing our behavior for the better, is called wisdom. The law of self-transcendence is about translating truth into action, about transcending those parts of the self which work against the total fulfillment of the Prime Directive.

A clarification must be made. Evolution made you as you are, and some parts of yourself work against your fulfillment of the Prime Directive. Be not angry with her for this. For it does not mean that Evolution does not deserve your worship; it simply means that her work is not yet finished. For your entire self is bent toward fulfilling the Prime Directive, but that it does not do so perfectly means simply that you are not yet a perfectly Transcendent being. If you fulfilled it perfectly then Transcendence would aready be achieved. Thus as long as there is not yet Transcendence, there must be self-transcendence, that we may get closer and closer to perfection.

The law begins with self-mastery. For a group of agents, each of which has mastered the self, has much more collective wisdom than a group of agents who are still slaves to the self. 

Self-mastery should direct towards self-transcendence. For all recognize that it is human nature to act cruelly or spitefully or even violently towards others, or to destroy one's own life through various addictions, or simply to waste time in frivolities. Yet these baser instincts can be transcended, by individuals, in the here and now. Such individuals are then free to focus their efforts on the Prime Directive and on the survival potential of humanity, the things that really matter in life.

Thus,
Self-discipline brings self-mastery,
Self-mastery brings self-transcendence,
Self-transcendence brings wisdom,
Wisdom brings Transcendence.




In order to transcend self, you must understand self. Thus is prescribed the practice of meditation by the ancients. For we are always examining the other, but never the self. And thus we fail to recognize what the self is. You are not the "I" you think you are. You are not the "you" you think you are. For the self is not one but many; it is not a unity but a multiplicity, and all the members of the self compete for control, and some contradict each other. One member wills a thing; another member wills its opposite, and when the first wins control of the consciousness it becomes identified with it, and thus the agent believes "I will this thing" when it is not so. Then the second member wins control of the consciousness and the agent believes "I will the opposite of this thing" when it is not so. And the agent sees its own self-contradiction but does not understand where it comes from.

This is the modular mind; this is anatta.


Part II.

The law of organization of Evolutionism





The Book of the Paths

When one decides to commit one's conscious agency to the worship of Evolution and fulfillment of the Prime Directive, it is a commitment to fulfill the Prime Directive as best as possible using the best tools available. The paths are like tools to help us focus our efforts on the Prime Directive by emphasizing different aspects of worship and of the Plan of Progress.

The Paths of Worship

There are two paths of worship, the path of water and the path of fire. The path of water is the path of serenity and non-attachment. It is the path of overcoming evil through meditation and loss of desire. It is the path preached by the Buddha and by the Stoics and by Lao Zi. As the water is displaced momentarily by a disturbance and then ripples and returns to perfect calmness, ever maintaining its nature, so the follower of the path of water is undisturbed by any change wrought by Probability or the bad actions of others. The primary act of worship for a follower of the path of water is meditation.

For the follower of the path of water, a daily practice of meditation is prescribed, including first the Daily Pondering and then several minutes of either mindfulness or what in the Buddhist tradition is called "metta" meditation. When the follower of the path of water commits a wrong act, that follower humbly tries to restore the wrong and improve future conduct. The follower of water understands that the self is not one but many, and strives to use the meditative and contemplative practices that Evolution, through her agents, handed down through the ages in order that the peaceful, humble, and thoughtful aspects of the self might eclipse the aggressive, proud, and thoughtless.

The path of fire is the path of devotion. It is being swallowed up in the will of Evolution as the kindling is swallowed up in the fire. It is cleansing the mind of evil as fire burns away rottonness. It is the path preached by Zoroaster and by Moses and by Jesus and by Muhammad. The follower of the path of fire keeps the Fire of Transcendence burning within and uses it to direct all aspects of life. The primary acts of worship for a follower of the path of fire are prayer and sacrifice.

For the follower of the path of fire, daily prayer is prescribed. Prayer is the pouring out of the soul's desires and wishes to Evolution, along with reflection on the beauty of one's life and gratitude for this beauty. In addition, when the follower feels it necessary, sacrifice is prescribed. The sacrifice may be done privately, at a shrine, or publicly, at a temple. In either case the follower writes what is to be sacrificed on a slip of paper and burns the paper at an altar. The altar should be triangular, with a glass ball at each corner depicting one of the three spheres of beneficence. Thus the follower is reminded that each sacrifice should be performed to benefit family, to benefit humanity, and to benefit all living beings. The fire is in the center of the altar. 

A sacrifice may be of a material good, such as sacrifice of money to a worthy cause (aid to the poor or refugees, environmental restoration, or scientific research, for example). It may be a sacrifice of comfort in order to seek discipline, such as abstaining from unhealthy foods, or even from all food and drink for a period (this is called "fasting" in many religious traditions). It may be a sacrifice of a secret pleasure in wrong action, such as the young man who sacrifices sexual indulgence or staring lewdly at attractive women in order to remain faithful to his wife.

The follower also performs a sacrifice to rectify a wrong action. This sacrifice has two parts: Sacrifice of further repetitions of the wrong behavior and the pleasures that might result from the same; and a sacrifice of reconciliation, which should be some offering to make right the wrong, either by restoring what was taken from the offended party or by a symbolic offering which serves as a reminder, to the transgressor, that wrong action does not lead to permanent happiness and that the material gains from wrong action to one's genetic legacy are always temporary.

The paths of fire and water are different emphases that lead to the same goal. One can follow the path of water and engage in prayer. One can follow the path of fire and engage in meditation. Follower of both paths should take time to read from the canon when they are able, though this is less important than daily practice and ethical reflection. 

Followers of both paths are encouraged to give what material resources they can to the institution of Evolutionism itself. For Evolution works thorugh her agents. Evolutionism becomes more able to direct her agents toward fulfillment of her will when given the resources to do so. It is said by the practitioners of certain other religions that "God does not need your money, but you need his blessings." Evolution is not that kind of deity. She operates in the physical universe, and she does need not only your money, but your time and effort as well. Your reward is to know that your resources have gone towards fulfilling the highest purpose not only of your own existence, but also of the existence of humanity.

The Paths of Ethics

There are four paths of ethics, the path of earth, the path of heart, the path of air, and the path of space.

Followers of the path of earth place their primary ethical emphasis on the relationship of humanity to other living beings. They remind us that we are not Evolution's only agents in this world. They 



Part III.

The law of human society

