The Prime Directive from Wisdom:

Wisdom consists of accepting, and acting on, the Truth, only the Truth, and nothing but the Truth.

The beginning of wisdom is to know the Truth about yourself. That is "becoming Conscious."

The first Truth about yourself is that you are an evolved being--the creation of Evolution. She is your creator, and by that single fact deserves your respect.

The second Truth about yourself is that Evolution created you for a purpose. Her first purpose for you is that you survive and help others to do the same, increasing your joy and alleviating your suffering; increasing their joy and alleviating their suffering. Her second purpose for you is that you partcipate in the bearing and raising of children, however you are able. And her third purpose is that you help humanity achieve Transcendence.

These three purposes, together, are the Plan of Progress, by which we fulfill the Prime Directive: to increase the Survival Potential of humanity. Follow them and you will fulfill the purpose for which you were created. Reject them and you reject that purpose. 

Those who remain Unconscious cannot fully "know themselves," even though they may enjoy certain valuable insights. They will, on average, fulfill the Prime Directive, though they will not understand what they are doing or why they do it. Those who are Conscious know what they are doing and why, and can use that knowledge to better fulfill the Prime Directive. It becomes the responsibility of the Conscious to use their knowledge wisely. 

The Plan of Progress operates over all time. Survival is the present, other people and children are the near future, and Transcendence is the long-term future. But you are the future of those who came before, and so the Prime Direcive embraces the entire history of life.





Questions and Answers

"But the self doesn't want to be understood!" Say rather that the self was designed to act rather than to be understood, or to understand itself. But Evolution, in her condescension, has given humanity the tools to finally understand ourselves.

"What about those who are disabled or otherwise unable to have children?" There are those who have no brain function. They are the dead. There are those whose brain function is so impaired that they have lost touch with reality. They are the insane. There are those whose brain function is too undeveloped to explicitly understand right behavior. They are very young children. All others are capable of living the Prime Directive in one form or another, including those with severe disabilities. Inclusive fitness teaches us that not only by direct reproduction does one preserve one's genetic legacy. Evolution graciously accepts all contributions.

"What about those who choose not to have children?" A person who chooses not to have children should examine their motives. If they commit themselves to some other aspect of the Prime Directive, that is noble. If they avoid children out of selfishness, that is shameful. Our counsel is moderation in both the having and not-having of children. We must simultaneously propagate humanity and not overrun our planet, humanity's only home.

"But will humanity ever achieve Transcendence?" That is the wrong question. Whether or not humanity ultimately achieves Transcendence is less important than the struggle to achieve it. If Transcendence is ultimately achieved, it will certainly not be within your lifetime. Transcendence is an eternal goal, so the drive to achieve Transcendence is Eternal Progression. 

"Then how may Transcendence be achieved?" This is still not the right question, because nobody knows the answer and nobody can know it. We will know Transcendence when we achieve it.

"Then how can I possibly help achieve Transcendence?" Paradoxically, this is the right question. Evolution has placed within you the drive for Eternal Progression. Others may counsel you for how to express that drive. Ultimately you must decide how to express it.



Wisdom to ponder

What is evolution but transcendence? It is the transcendence of less-adapted forms by more-adapted ones. But some say this means that the more-adapted forms exterminate all of the less-adapted. They say this in ignorance and do not comprehend themselves as part of a larger whole. For surely one would consider humanity as the most-adapted form? But if humanity were to exterminate all other forms, humanity itself would go extinct. We don't know how much damage is done to humanity's future when an unknown species goes extinct, thus we must use caution. Thus the third point of the Plan of Progress is to protect the sacred right of all life to fulfill the Prime Directive. Thus the goal of humanity, rather than transcendence-of-less-adapted-other, should be transcendence-of-less-adapted-self. Only this way will we achieve the true Transcendence.

All that lives is under the law of Evolution, the Prime Directive.

The mind is not one, but many. Thus the entities of the mind have not one goal, but many. They are so many that they cannot all be satisfied. Thus happiness cannot come by satisfying all desires; if so, happiness would be impossible, but by observing that happiness is felt by some people we know that it is possible. Desire works frequently contrary to happiness, thus the Buddha's insight that tanha (craving, desire) is dukkha (empty, painful). Thus the admonition of Jesus that "He who loses his life shall find it." 

Evolution gave us desire that we might fulfill the Prime Directive, thus we must learn to turn it to that purpose. Evolution gave us happiness to know that our actions have helped fulfill the Prime Directive, thus happiness is a moral goal. Master the mind to become a conscious agent. 

Instinct and intution, desire and reason, pain and pleasure, planning and goals. These are the tools Evolution gave us to help us fulfill the Prime Directive. Mastery of the mind is learning to properly use these tools. Parts of our mind belong to a past when violence and harm of others was the best way to fulfill the Prime Directive. These must be transcended, for the conscious agent who possesses true wisdom knows that by harming others, the survival potential of humanity is harmed, and thus one's own descendents and one's own genetic legacy are harmed, and thus the weapon against others that one thought would help bring advantage in fulfilling the Prime Directive twisted in the hand and was turned against the one who wielded it. Thus the Prime Directive teaches us to know ourselves and transcend those parts of our nature that teach us to do unprovoked violence to others. This is part of the first point of the Plan of Progress: "To understand myself as an evolved being and become a conscious agent of Evolution." It is also why Love is one of the virtues of the Plan of Progress. For what is Love but the identification of one's own welfare with that of another? And if one increases the welfare of another the survival potential of humanity is increased, and one's own genetic legacy is better preserved, and one better fulfills the Prime Directive. Thus the gift that one thought would disadvantage one in fulfilling the Prime Directive changed in the hand and was multiplied a thousand-fold to the giver.

Evolution gave us the Prime Directive, the beginning of morality. Some say that focus on the Prime Directive, the preservation of one's own genetic leads to competition, tribalism, and needless suffering, and that Evolution cannot be moral. But Evolution is cleverer than their philosophy. For the conscious agent, possessed of wisdom, knows that to best fulfill the Prime Directive, humanity must not go extinct. Thus the conscious agent must focus on the welfare of family and of humanity, neglecting neither the one nor the other. Thus the Prime Directive encapsulates the instinctive moral knowledge we are all born with. True wisdom knows that moral goodness is best achieved through alignment.

Why do we squabble over pebbles of resources here and there? Of course the pebbles help us to increase our genes' fitness and fulfill the Prime Directive. But the true fight is not over pebbles. Even the ancients knew that the true battle is order against chaos, Marduk against Tiamat. For if entropy wins at last, it is meaningless if one or the other person gets the pebbles. Thus the one who squabbles over pebbles and ignores the true battle has only temporarily increased genetic fitness rather than truly fulfilling the Prime Directive.

Evolution gave us the gift of reason, which helps us to realize these truths. Thus Evolution teaches us to achieve a higher morality through better fulfillment of the Prime Directive than "survival of the fittest." Evolution teaches us the meaning and purpose of morality, and thereby possesses ultimate MORAL AUTHORITY over humanity. This is why Evolution is a Goddess worth worshipping, because she possesses that moral authority.



Wise sayings

No one person can know everything. But humanity, in principle, can know everything that is knowable.

Evolution is not random. She is governed by probabilities, as is life, but she exploits them to her advantage to create new and better things.

You may find the Truth hard, both mentally and emotionally. This does not make it less True, and it does not make you courageous if you run from the Truth.

There is something within you that is satisfied, taking joy in the small moments of life. There is something within you that is not satisfied, reaching instead for transcendence. Feed them both. By feeding the part that is satisfied, you will cultivate happiness; by feeding the part that is unsatisfied, you will achieve greatness and help humanity to do the same. Evolution designed these competing forces within us to achieve those very outcomes.

"Moderation in everything"--especially in the mind. The mind is a sea of constant struggle for attention among its members. If one member permanently silences the rest, the result is always disastrous.

Self in family, family in humanity, humanity in nature, nature in God. Self as family, family as humanity, humanity as nature, nature as God.

To Evolution, the individual is important only in relation to the species. But the individual must always be incentivized to cooperate by believing itself to be of supreme importance.

Did the great philosopher, the great scientist, or the great artist make themselves? No, they were rather made by something else: Evolution, executing her will through the parents, family, mentors, community, and nations of these people.

Feelings are the reasons for action. Evolution designed our feelings to act in certain ways so that we would follow the Prime Directive while Unconscious. Do not be angry with Evolution when you learn that some of those ways are counterproductive in the modern world, as if you could design a being better suited to this world than yourself. Instead learn to direct your feelings in the right way, so that Evolution's grand design is achieved.

The purpose of religion is to teach humanity truths about humanity, so that they will be internalized fully enough to be acted upon rather than merely understood. Do not be angry with the ancients for the lack of understanding in their religions. The understanding they did possess laid the groundwork for your own fuller understanding, as you will lay the groundwork for the more perfect uderstanding of those who come after you. But Evolutionism is a superior religion to those that came before becaues it embraces all Truth, rather than only a part of it.



Wisdom from the great thinkers and traditions of humanity

Blasie Pascal on the problem of non-mindfulness: "Let each of us examine his thoughts; he will find them wholly concerned with the past or the future. We almost never think of the present, and if we do think of it, it is only to see what light it throws on our plans for our future. The present is never our end. The past and the present are our means, the future alone our end. Thus we never actually live, but hope to live, and since we are always planning how to be happy, it is inevitable that we should never be so." - Pensees, p. 13

Steven Pinker on progression: "Human nature contains the seeds of its own improvement." - Enlightenment Now. A conscious agent would go further and say "Human nature contains the seeds which blossom into transcendence of itself." For what is Evolution but continuous transcendence of previous weaknesses, which caused needless suffering and death? And this continuous trancendence leads to the final Transcendence.

"We never nullify a verse, nor cause it to be forgotten, unless We bring one better than it, or similar to it." - Qur'an 2:106. So it should be with the texts of Evolutionism. Modify these writings, but modify them with care, never to decrease the wisdom of humanity, but always to increase it.

"264  O you who believe! Do not nullify your charitable deeds with reminders and hurtful words, like him who spends his wealth to be seen by the people, and does not believe in Allah and the Last Day. His likeness is that of a smooth rock covered with soil: a downpour strikes it, and leaves it bare—they gain nothing from their efforts... 267  O you who believe! Give of the good things you have earned, and from what We have produced for you from the earth. And do not pick the inferior things to give away, when you yourselves would not accept it except with eyes closed. " - Qur'an 2:264, 267 (ClearQuran) Thus conscious agents should serve others without ulterior motives, and should use their best efforts in the service of others rather than inferior efforts.

"For of him unto whom much is given much is required." - Doctrine and Covenants 82:2. Thus conscious agents should use their knowledge wisely.

"There are four ways of giving charity. One wishes to give but wants no one else to give. This is unjust towards others. One wishes others to give but himself refuses. This is evil on his part. One gives and wishes others to give. He is pious. One will not give and wants no one else to. He is wicked." - Babylonian Talumd in Selection, Tractate Aboth

"Raba ben Mehasia said, in the name of Rabbi Hama ben Goria, in the name of Raba: One should never single out one of his children. Because Jacob gave Joseph two Selah weight more of silk than to his other children, Joseph's brothers became jealous of him, and this finally caused our forefathers to go to Egypt." - Babylonian Talumd in Selection, Tractate Sabbath