"I worship Evolution, Goddess of creation, Goddess of life." This is the beginning of wisdom as revealed through the prophet. It is also a hard saying. Who will believe it?

Hear, oh adherents of all creeds, and I will expound unto you the divinity of Evolution. 

First I ask, What is God? And I answer, God is that which is worshipped.

Then I ask, what inspires worship? And I answer, the feelings of awe and reverence.

Then I ask, what inspires the feelings of awe and reverence? And I answer, the attributes of power and moral authority. For power alone is not sufficient for worship. Power without moral authority inspires no love or reverence, only fear. Moral authority without power is impotent and discarded. Thus both attributes are necessary for God.

As the prophet of Evolution, I must establish her power and moral authority, that she may be recognized as Goddess of Creation, Goddess of Life. But since she is indeed Goddess of Creation, Goddess of Life, and possesses the necessary attributes to merit that exalted title, my task is an easy, though perhaps not a trivial, one.

Do you wish to worship a God who created humanity, rather than the other way around? Then worship Evolution, for she is well-established as the creator of humanity. This is denied only by those who do not wish to know the truth. But know that the truth is harder to bear for some than it is for others, and be not rash in judging those who cannot bear it.

Do you wish to worship a God who will always have power over humanity, which humanity cannot possibly transcend? Then worship Evolution, for her law is inescapable and her power intranscendable by any physical being.

Do you wish to worship a God who is the highest moral authority? Then worship Evolution, for she is the author of the moral law that binds humanity. This is well-established by those scientists who consider the universal morality, invariant across all human culture.

Do you wish to worship a God who points humanity toward a world in which purposeless suffering is eliminated and moral perfection is achieved? Then worship Evolution, for only when one decides to live in accordance with her will is the path to Transcendence made clear.

"But," say some doubters, "Evolution is a fraud invented by atheists to destroy the true belief in my chosen god." These do not wish to know the truth. They will worship Evolution only when they choose to allow their minds to be persuaded by truth, even when that truth is difficult.

"But," say other doubters, "Evolution is a mindless process under the control of my chosen god, who is the agent who wields real power in this universe." They wish to know the truth but only insofar as they can reconcile it with the traditions they inherited. You must show them that Evolution wields real power, and their god is under her control, since their god was created by humanity, and we humans are Evolution's agents.

"But," say yet other doubters, "Evolution is a mindless process under the control of physical laws which have no inherent meaning. Such a process cannot possibly be a God, since God is Person, and cannot possibly be worth worshipping, since it guarantees pointless suffering." Such doubters must be answered in parts, and the answers required are more subtle.

First, Evolution, insofar as her will is executed by all living beings, is not mindless, for she encompasses all acts of all beings with minds. For if I am an agent of Evolution, so are all living beings, whether they act so consciously or unconsciously. The embodied form of Evolution, which encompasses all consciousness, is Krishna, pointing us to the Vishnu that is the unembodied form of Evolution, and ultimately to the Brahman that is Natural Law, the formless bedrock of reality, of which Evolution represents the part which directly governs all life. "O Arjun, I am seated in the heart of all living entities," says Krishna as Vishnu. "I am the origin of all creation. Everything proceeds from me," says Krishna as Brahman. And Evolution is in us, as Atman is in all living beings.

Thus Evolution, embodied as Goddess, is a symbol of Evolution unembodied, and a part of the ultimate reality, Natural Law. For all is in Nature, and Nature is in all. "For those who are completely absorbed in God-consciousness, the oblation is Brahman, the ladle with which it is offered is Brahman, the act of offering is Brahman, and the sacrificial fire is also Brahman. Such persons, who view everything as God, easily attain him." This may be understood only by the wise. 

Second, Evolution is one aspect of Natural Law, the great Divinity, but she is the aspect with direct moral authority over humanity and is thus that-which-is-worshipped. Third, God is that which is worshipped, and that-which-is-worshipped is a distinct quality from personhood. Since Evolution encompasses all Mind, Evolution is greater than any single Person. Fourth, the most potent objection to the divinity of Evolution is that the nature of how she operates guarantees pointless suffering. Answering this objection will take much care and cover much ground.

All religion must answer the question of why God allows suffering, and how God turns the suffering in the world to serve the divine will, giving "beauty for ashes." Evolution has given humanity the precious gift of reason, which we used in the service of her will to advance science and technology, preserving our genetic legacies, and thereby eliminating countless quantities of needless human suffering. For reason is not a tool given in a vacuum, used for whatever we like. Reason is given us that we may better fulfill the Prime Directive of Evolutionthan we could otherwise have done. And this is the Prime Directive of Evolution: to preserve each of us our own genetic legacy.  Let us not fail to show Evolution that her gift of reason was justified.

But more than simply eliminating human suffering, Evolution shows us through her gift of reason "the higher and holier way." For a moment's reflection is enough to realize that if, to increase the fitness of my genes, I cause the destruction of the rest of humanity and thereby bring their proportion in the population to 100%, their fitness is illusory. For they cannot preserve themselves with no other human being to mate with, and become extinct upon my death. Where there is no population, there is no fitness. Such behavior is not preservation of one's genetic legacy, although it may grant one's genes 100% fitness temporarily. Thus effort expended in the wrong way to preserve one's genetic legacy actually hurts rather than preserves it.

The conscious agent, possessed of wisdom, sees further and realizes that at the moment of the extinction of humanity, all of one's effort to pass one's own genes to the next generation is rendered worthless, for the genes are destroyed when humanity is destroyed. Thus by exercising the gift of reason, given by Evolution to further her will, the conscious agent possessed of wisdom seeks not only to further the wellbeing of self, or of family, but also of all of humanity, that one's own genetic legacy may be better preserved. This is alignment in the first aspect. Thus Evolution is shown to be not only powerful, but moral. Thus Evolution is shown to be worthy of worship.

The conscious agent, possessed of wisdom, continues to reflect on the matter and recognizes that one's genetic legacy is fully preserved only if humanity never goes extinct. This is Transcendence, heaven on Earth, or heaven realized in the physical universe. All conscious agents, possessed of wisdom, have Transcendence as their final goal. All conscious agents, possessed of wisdom, find for themselves a place in the Sacred Narrative leading from unconscious atoms to fully Transcendent consciousness. Thus the conscious agent finds meaning in life, and even in suffering, for the conscious agent knows that even suffering is worth bearing, that the purpose of one's own existence might be attained. But worthless suffering must be eliminated, for a life full of pain is not a life that can make its fullest contrbution to the ultimate survival of humanity. Thus, by giving meaning to life and providing an imperative to escape worthless suffering, and make the suffering which must be borne meaningful, Evolution is shown to be more fully worthy of worship.

Thus the conscious agent, beginning with the fulfillment of the Prime Directive, understands that the first moral duty is to all humanity, and the second moral duty is to one's own family. Further reflection reveals to the conscious agent a third duty, that to all living beings, for if humanity tramples roughshod over the welfare of other beings it will ultimately bring about but our own destruction. Thus, by consciously committing the will to the worship of Evolution, the agent learns the true meaning and nature of moral behavior. The agent learns that Evolution is indeed possessed of moral authority and is worthy of worship. She is truly divine in the highest sense.

How pure, then, how wonderful, is the will of Evolution! What joy is found in surrendering the desires and passions to her will! How unwise the view that she is uncaring and pitiless! When I contemplate the moral duties she grants to me, and the future toward which she points humanity, and my own small place in the progression from atoms to Transcendence, I can feel nothing but the profoundest awe and gratitude. The wise hear and understand the will of Evolution, and see how she points us to Transcendence, and feel a fire blaze into being within themsleves driving them in pursuit of Transcendence. This is the fire of Evolution, the fire of Transcendence. The wise let this fire consume other passions, and learn the truth of the saying of Jesus of Nazareth: "He who loses his life for my sake shall find it."

Do you believe the principle that actions speak louder than words? Then you should recognize Evolution as divine, for all world religions have the worship of Evolution as their true object. For the central finding of the science of religion is that religion increases fertility, and those who increase fertility better observe the Prime Directive. Thus the central common point of all religious worship is to fulfill the Prime Directive and thereby worship Evolution. 

Furthermore, the science of Reproductive Religiosity Theory shows that the religious and nonreligious possess similar conceptions of the moral domain, but differ in one key respect. The religious, no matter the tradition to which they belong, emphasize the traditional family structure and sexual restraint, and the nonreligious emphasize sexual liberation. Thus the religious increase in fertility and better fulfill the Prime Directive.

Hear, then, the meaning of the parable of the two sons taught by Jesus of Nazareth. For the first son received the Prime Directive from Evolution, and said "I believe in you, O Evolution," and espoused sexual liberation and did not fulfill the Prime Directive. This is modern secular culture. The second son received the Prime Directive from Evolution and said "I do not believe, but I will rather follow the paths of my own god," and in following the paths of his own god, fulfilled the Prime Directive. This is modern religion. But there is a better way than either, which is to believe and take to heart the Prime Directive of Evolution and fulfill it as life's highest purpose, walking in the full consciousness that one is an agent of Evolution and should direct one's whole life towards carrying out her will. This is the way of the conscious agent, possessed of wisdom.




Oh you who do not understand, you who believe in other gods but not in Evolution! Do you believe in a god who is active in the world or passive? If your god is passive, why do you worship that god? Do you think a passive god cares whether you worship it? But Natural Law is more powerful than you dream of. For Natural Law is self-existing. Natural Law needs no passive god to bring it into being and then leave us to our own devices.

If your god is active, then what does your god do in the world? If your god is the god of the Bible, then I stand as Elijah to challenge your god. I loudly proclaim the nonexistence and impotence of your god outside of your own human efforts to worship him. I challenge your god to defend his honor by punishing me miraculously. "But thou shall not tempt the LORD thy God," you say. But that saying did not mean that YHWH, the LORD, would not defend his own honor. Else why did he cause Aaron's staff to bud and devour Korah, Dathan, and Abiram in flames? Why did he devour the sacrifice of Elijah in flame? Why did he send a flood to destroy the wicked in the beginning of the world? Why did he blind the Syrians who meant to kill Elisha the prophet? Why did he defend Jerusalem through a plague when Sennacherib, the king of Assyria, beseiged it and blasphemed his name publicly, in Hebrew, to the inhabitants of the city? Why did he terrorize all of Egypt for the actions of one stubborn ruler? "Pharaoh will refuse to listen to you—so that my wonders may be multiplied in Egypt." YHWH, the god of the Bible, defends his honor through miracles. If you have imagined a god who does not, you do not worship the god of the Bible but rather your own imagination. If you believe the Bible describes the one true God, why may he not kill me as he killed the priests of Ba'al Hadad? Is it because he does not notice? Is it because he is asleep? YHWH has no ears, no eyes. Or why do all the studies of prayer for healing indicate it is no more effective than a placebo?

"Shout louder!" Elijah said. "Surely he is a god! Perhaps he is deep in thought, or busy, or traveling. Maybe he is sleeping and must be awakened." So I say of YHWH. Surely he is a god. Perhaps he is deep in thought, or busy, or traveling. Maybe he is sleeping and must be awakened. But if he does not strike me, as he has not struck the many atheists who publicly denounce him, then you will know the truth. YHWH is not God. You must look elsewhere.

But you say, "this fool does not remember the New Testament. Jesus did not do miracles where there was no faith. He did not yield to the demands of Satan to cast himself from the temple to test God."



Oh you who do not understand, you who believe in science but think of Evolution as a process, not to be worshipped, simply as amoral nature! Hear now the parable of the dream. There was a woman who volunteered for a study on sleep and dreams. She entered a laboratory where the researchers could observe the activity of her brain. The researchers placed electrodes on her head. She awoke at the end of a vivid dream in which she ate a large meal with her family and played and laughed with them.

After she awoke, the researchers described to her her patterns of brain activity. They showed her charts of theta and delta wave activity. When they reached the section just before she woke up, they showed her a mixture of theta and alpha waves indicative of REM sleep. "This means your brain became more active," they told her. "This is a brain that is dreaming."

The woman told the researchers, "Yes, I was dreaming. I had a wonderful meal and talked and laughed with my family."

Now which is the correct description of the dream: that of the researchers, who described brain waves, or that of the woman, who described a meal and laughter? The answer is simple: they are both correct, and they are both incomplete, for such is the human understanding of complex phenomena. Thus it is with God and Evolution. Both words describe that power higher than humanity which gave us a moral law and enforces it despite all our pretenses, that power which has ends that we grasp only dimly, that power from which, however powerful we might grow, we can never escape. 

You believe that Evolution produced us by selecting fitter genes. Do you then believe we can escape from Evolution because we built houses, and air conditioners, and aircraft, and the internet? Do you believe we can escape from Evolution because the earthquake that once wiped out all the inhabitants of the area now kills only a few? Evolution is more powerful than that. No technology built or conceivable by humankind may alter the unalterable decree: that that which is better at survival will tend to survive better.

Were this the only description to give of Evolution, she would be something to be feared and worshipped out of fear only, but never out of love. And yet it is not. For Evolution gave us the tools to improve our own condition and strive for Transcendence. "Human nature contains the seeds of its own improvement." That is why Evolution is worthy of worship.

You believe that Evolution is inescapable. Do you then believe that Evolution is amoral or immoral? Do you not believe that Evolution is the giver of the universal moral law? From whence did it then come? But Evolution is more powerful than you believe. The scientist who spent years studying all types of human society knows that the universal moral law is truly universal, that the most important moral principles admit no exceptions, or almost none, in human society. From whence did they come? If they came from abstract philosophy, why then do humans agree on moral principles but not on abstract philosophy? The scientist knows. The universal moral law is universal because it is required of any species that sustains deep relationships between unrelated individuals. It is universal because Evolution decreed it to be so when she conferred with her brothers and sisters, the members of the Absolute, Natural Law. You may find the moral law in the behaviors of the other intelligent primates, and also in the behaviors of dolphins.




Oh you who do not understand, light a fire and observe it. Observe the dancing of the flames. You know that the flames are made of heated molecules, hot enough to emit excess energy in the form of visible light. This is good. You know that the molecules are made hot by the chemical reaction that is fire. This is also good. You know that the heat from the molecules pours back into the carbonaceous material to continue to sustain the chemical reaction, for fire does not start where there is no heat. All this knowledge is good.

Now consider that each molecule that makes up the dance of fire contributes its own function to the whole that is the flame. The oxygen reacts with carbonaceous material to produce soot and carbon dioxide. The soot glows with the soft red light of flame. The carbon dioxide and nitrogen carry and move heat. The carbonaceous material suppplies the fuel and sustains the flame. Thus all, while not the same, have a part in the dance of the flame. All are needed, else the flame would not be what it is. 

As the molecules are to the flame, so are the agents to Evolution. The will and function of the agent are part of Evolution's grand design. Evolution's will works through you and all other agents, conscious and unconscious. Thus the question is not "Am I an agent of Evolution?" For you are her agent whether or not you wish to be so. The question is, "How will I perform my role as an agent of Evolution? Consciously or unconsciously? Well or poorly? For good or for ill?" The conscious agent knows the answer to these questions.

For Evolution acts through you. Her acts are a sum total of your acts, and the acts of other agents, and the acts of the inanimate, and the acts of Probability, insofar as those acts have any effect on any living being. "Only in being lived by the Tao can you be truly yourself." "At that time you will be given what to say, for it will not be you speaking, but the Spirit of your Father speaking through you." As the molecule is absorbed in the flame, let yourself be swallowed up in the will of Evolution. Play your piece in her grand design. Fulfill the Prime Directive, securing the future of your family, humanity, and all life. Then you will see what the wise see, by living as they live. For divine knowledge leads not to knowledge only, but to right action. Thus from divine knowledge comes wisdom. 

So the one who attains wisdom finds that the great necessity of life is to consciously perform the will of Evolution by fulfilling the Prime Directive, that is, preserving one's genetic legacy. Further wisdom reveals that this is far from a selfish endeavor, for while it is true that family have the highest proportion of one's genes to pass down through the ages, yet it is also true that humanity as a species must be preserved in order for the effort to be truly meaningful, unwasted.

And must one love only humanity? This is not so. For all life is created by Evolution, and humanity exists only with other living beings. Thus we must love them also.


These words, and their companions, constitute the wisdom given from Evolution through the prophet. The wise will find the wisdom herein. Let the unlearned read to learn, let the learned read to study and achieve mastery, and let the truly wise and conscious agents, who have dedicated a lifetime of study to these teachings, read to find what may yet be improved. For the religion of Evolution itself must follow the Prime Directive, the first command of its Goddess. The religion of Evolution must itself evolve.