*** FIRST DRAFT. NEEDS LOTS OF WORK ON STYLE AND TONE. JUST TRYING TO GET THE GIST OF THE ARGUMENTS AND IDEAS ACROSS. ***


Part 0: The Book

"I worship Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life." This is the starting point of the wisdom that was given to the prophet. The prophet has begun the task of revealing the wisdom of Evolution to humanity. This book does not give a complete account of all wisdom--for who can know all the depths of wisdom?--but it exists to show humanity that the proper understanding of our evolutionary heritage leads to real wisdom, not merely to knowledge. It invites humanity to reimagine what is commonly referred to as religion, through a new path named Evolutionism, the worship of Evolution.

Many questions will arise in the reader's mind, and those questions will be answered. I say here only that Evolutionism involves no commitment to metaphyiscs that a scientist would be unhappy to make, for the prophet, also a scientist, knows that to challenge Science on its own turf is folly except through scientific research. I say also that the principal insights obtained by the prophet are not scientific but pertain to how we must use the tools Evolution has given us, along with our knowledge of her purpose for us, to improve our conception of morality, and how to communicate this to others.

This book is a sacred text beause it deals with what is sacred, that is, of highest value and to be treated with reverence. Sacred literature, more than any other literature, must walk consciously in the twilight between the bright day of the literal and the rich night of the symbolic. That is why it is written as it is.

This book is incomplete. The prophet pondered long and deeply to attain this wisdom--for Evolution does not work by faith and revelation. Evolution is not that kind of deity. She gives us the tools, reason and intuition, and teaches us to use them, and expects us to do so. Evolution "helps those who help themselves."

The prophet claims that title in the sense that the ancient Hebrew prophets did, in that a prophet was one who correctly communicated the will of God to the people. He claims no special moral standing and no special gifts, only certain insights and the duty to share them with humanity. He shares the feeling of Jeremiah of old: 

"...[her] word is in my heart like a fire,
    a fire shut up in my bones.
I am weary of holding it in;
    indeed, I cannot." (NIV Jer. 20:9)



Part 1: Nature and ways of knowing and viewing the world

When we try to make sense of the world, we begin with our own experiences. Indeed, if we are perfectly honest with ourselves, our own experiences are the only things we can be absolutely certain of, since although we believe that the other people around us have similar experiences to our own, and most of them act as if they do, yet experience also suggests to us that we are sometimes mistaken about things, even gravely mistaken, such that it is not inconceivable (though certainly improbable) that we are mistaken about the meaning of all of our experiences. Strictly speaking it is even possible that we have false memories and that tomorrow the entire world will change or end, so that the only thing we can be truly certain of is the experiences that we experience in the present.

Faced with such a vast theoretical chasm between what Bertrand Russell called our "sense-data" and the reality that seems to underlie them, we have no choice but to make some kind of assumption or set of assumptions that we cannot prove in order to make any progress at all in interpreting or making sense of the world. These assumptions become the axioms, or presuppositions, or foundations of our worldview. Everyone must have axioms; everyone's worldview includes assumptions that it cannot prove. Nobody is immune. The necessicty of such assumptions is suggested by the structure of logic itself, for logic cannot prove anything at all unless it has some statement that is definitely true or false to begin with.

There are those who assert that it is possible to begin with sense-data and from them alone argue to a coherent understanding of the world. This position has had no credibility among true philosophers for hundreds of years, due to a fmaous objection made by David Hume. Hume argued that when we reason with sense-data we assume that the past will be similar to the future, but that we have no rational ground for doing so. His objection showed that a core type of logical argument, called reasoning from induction, lacked any logical or rational foundation. It is true that if reality is governed by unchanging laws, and that if our sense perceptions are sufficiently reliable guides to reality, that something like induction is exactly what we would expect. But Hume argued that we can never really be sure that all the laws won't change tomorrow, or that all our sense-perceptions are sufficiently reliable guides to reality. Thus he said that our core understanding of the nature of the world was based on custom, or habit, rather than reason and logic.

There are those who assert that there should be a good argument to choose certain axioms and not others. They generally have not learned sufficinetly from the experience of mathematics. In mathematics there are only two criteria for axioms: First, that they not lead to provable contradictions, and second, that they lead to some useful result. Thousands of years ago, Euclid thought that his axioms were so obvious as to need no proof; modern ma 

What is "nature"? Perhaps it is best to understand nature by understanding what it is not. Many will say that there are beings supernatural, meaning beings outside of nature. Some say there are principles outside of nature, such as certain kinds of moral or mathematical principles. Others say that nature is the set of all things that, in principle, could be understood and explained by science. 

Supernatural beings are considered supernatural because they have power that nature should not allow, or somehow are not constrained by natural law. By this is meant simply that they are not constrained by the laws that we observe to constrain humans, animals, and other living beings on Earth. But it should be granted that they are constrained by some law or another, else their actions would be purely arbitrary. Even those who grant an omnipotent God do not say that such a God acts arbitrarily, else there would be no reason for them to worship God or call him just. They must grant that he be constrained by some law, even if that law emanates from his own nature. Therefore all beings, whether natural or supernatural, are constrained by some law and the law that constrains us ordinary beings is Natural Law.

There is a problem with the concept of supernatural beings. They cannot be observed as can natural beings, namely with the ordinary senses of sight, smell, taste, touch, and hearing. According to those who believe in them, supernatural beings must be observed by special mental faculties ordinarily unavailable to us. These faculties are themselves problematic, however, for science, in particular Neuroscience, has never observed them.

Furthermore, our primary sources for information about these beings are often sacred texts which, though of great antiquity and worthy of respect, have not generally communicated history accurately. They introduce legendary figures as though historical, in order to communicate sacred narratives. Thus we may wonder if the supernatural beings, Gods or otherwise, which they describe, are also legendary rather than physically existing. We certainly cannot take the assertion of ancient texts merely at literal face value.

Many will say they have no need of proof from history or Neuroscience, because they have experienced God directly through visions, spiritual feelings, or other events that could have been nothing except divinely ordained. And yet, nothing but impossibility is outside the realm of Probability, and visions and spiritual feelings confirm, rather than lead, our seekings and strivings. Oh you who know your God exists because you have seen Him in vision! The prophet was once a Christian and saw the Christian God in vision. After he learned wisdom and worshipped Evolution, he saw Evolution and the gradual unfolding of life in vision instead. Oh you who have experienced the love of God in your hearts! The prophet was once like you and experienced the love and redemption of Jesus in his heart. Once he learned wisdom and worshipped Evolution, he felt love and gratitude for Evolution, rather than the love of Jesus, burning in his heart. Then he understood why the Muslim experiences Allah, the Hindu experiences Vishnu or Brahman or Shakti or Shiva, the Buddhist experiences Nirvana, and the followers of other religions experience their own Gods or ultimate realities. Spiritual experiences show us the reality of the God we are already seeking. But to trust your spiritual feelings you must first learn which God to seek, and there is a different kind of truth for that.

God, or whatever ultimate reality is, must conform to logic or else be completely arbitrary. It is our experience that reality is sometimes arbitrary but usually not, and when it seems arbitrary the reasons can often but not always be found. We conclude, then, that we should believe that ultimate reality conforms to logic unless we can clearly demonstrate otherwise. There is a way to investigate reality that conforms to logic. It is called science.

Part 2: Science

The unwise invoke the black cat to affirm the superiority of science over philosophy and intuition. They say:

"Philosophy is like searching for a black cat in a dark room.

Metaphysics is like searching for a black cat in a dark room with no cat.

Theology is like searching for a black cat in a dark room with no cat and shouting, 'I found it!'

Science is like searching for a black cat in a dark room, but with a flashlight."

First, they have categorized incorrectly, for metaphysics is merely the philosophy of that which exists, theology is merely philosophy applied to God, and religion, which they meant to criticize but did not, is how intuition is translated to ritual and values.

Second, they have ignored that science has no existence without philosophy, for science itself relies on assumptions that are themselves philosophical and which science itself cannot prove at all. Those who would justify these assumptions from science must themselves resort to bad philosophy in the form of Hume's fallacy of induction: "Science works, therefore the assumptions of science are justified."

Thus we say instead that science, given certain philosophical assumptions, may discover truth that philosophy and religion cannot. But science is not philosophy, and philosophy may discover truth that science cannot. Albert Einstein was a pantheist. And how did he arrive at his pantheism? Through science? Yes, but not directly. Science convinced him that the natural world was infinitely rich and complex. Then, through philosophy and indeed through intuition, he called this richness and complexity "God." That is the theology of Albert Einstein. It is not science alone that inspires these ideas.

For: 
Intellect corrects intuition,
Intuition corrects values,
Values correct rituals,
Rituals correct behavior.
Behavior fulfills the Prime Directive and serves Evolution.

Thus, in the group,
Science corrects philosophy,
Philosophy corrects ethics,
Ethics correct religion,
Religion corrects behavior.

In the person,
Religion inspires ritual,
Ritual inspires belief,
Belief inspires values,
Values inspire thought,
Thought inspires action,
Action inspires change in the person.

Those who believe that one may go directly from intellect to correct behavior lack wisdom and will not better the human condition. So we see that intellect is not the master, but Evolution, who gave the intellect, is the master. We are the agents, devoted to carrying out her will. And we must use all the tools she gave us in carrying out her will.

Science in its sphere,
Philosophy in its sphere,
Religion in its sphere,
Psychology in its sphere,
Intuition in its sphere,
Wisdom in all spheres, for wisdom is superior to all.

Part 3: The knowledge of the human condition gained by science. Natural Law as God.

Part 4: Religion

Religion is the art of taking a story and making it yours. 

Religion is the view that ultimate reality is sacred. Atheism is the view that ultimate reality is not sacred, but rather that the sacred is what I choose to make sacred.

Religion is the view that shared rituals lead to shared values. Atheism is the view that only the intellect can lead to shared values.



Part 5: The human condition as presented by religion

Part 6: Morality, as it presents itself

...Yet we have reason to doubt the picture that we receive of morality, and here is an original argument as to why this is the case. The prophet begs the philosopher to indulge him, as one untrained, and to afterwards correct the numerous errors which he must have made in preparing the argument, which he calls the argument from Indefinability of Axioms.

Let three propsitions be granted:

First, that there are three types of statements in a chain of logical reasoning: Those that are used to prove other statements, those that are proved by other statements, and those that are both of these. 

Second, that there exists no infinite chain of reasoning.

Thirdly, that there is no such thing as the supernatural.

Then assume by way of contradiction that there exists a set of ethical facts, that is, true ethical propositions, that are not contingent upon any natural fact.

Then take the set S of all possible chains of ethical reasoning. First discard any chains which commit logical errors or fallacies (that is, those chains which break the rules of logic in describing how the conclusions follow from the premises), then discard any chains which reach false conclusions, then discard any chains which start from false premises. Take the remainder and call it the set S' of all VALID chains of ethical reasoning.

Now take Q, the set of all propositions appearing in any chain s' which is a member of S', i.e. the set of ethical facts, and evaluate each member of Q, discarding any members that are proved by any other members of Q in ANY s'. You are left with set Q', the set of ethical facts not derivable from any other ethical facts.

Now we have assumed that there exist some ethical facts not derivable from natural facts. If that is so, then some subset Q'' of Q' must consist of such ethical facts, for if all q' in Q' were derivable from natural facts then all ethical facts would be also (take a moment to convince yourself that this is so). 

Now if the elements q'' of the set Q'' are not dependent on either ethical or natural facts then they are dependent on nothing at all (since we are leaving aside the supernatural) and are therefore axiomatic. Furthermore, since there are no valid chains of ethical reasoning that we have left unexamined, we may be confident that the set Q'' contains all true ethical axioms.

Now that we have given a method to construct the set of all ethical axioms, let us examine the problems, for in fact the argument which seems to allow us to construct Q'' is invalid in such a way as to render Q'' non-constructable.

The problem arises at the step in which we discarded all chains of ethical reasoning that begin from false premises. A premise that has been arrived at by false reasoning should be ruled out, as should a premise that is obviously wrong, where by "obviously wrong" we mean "in contradiction to what is observed in nature." But the ruling out of "obviously wrong" premises immediately throws us into serious difficulties, for it is the peculiar nature of ethics that a premise that seems "obviously wrong" and in contradiction with the nature of ethics or human beings, etc., to one person may defended as perfectly ethical by another, and vice versa. We could resolve this difficulty and find the truly valid premises if only we had at our disposal a set of fundamental premises which we could be sure are true and derive others from them... but such a set is equivalent to Q'', so we find that we must construct Q'' in order to construct Q''! 

At this point the objection might be made that it is possible to find some OTHER way of constructing Q'' that resolves the difficulty. Indeed, it is possible to see every ethical theory as an attempt to do just that and then elaborate on the consequences. But what complicates this effort greatly is that there are multiple coherent sets of axioms that look like Q'' but are diametrically opposed to each other, and we have difficulty choosing between such sets to find the "real Q''." Let us examine two such candidate sets.

Set A:
1) There exists a property G that is identical to moral goodness.
2) To say that an action has G entails that the action is performed by a conscious agent.
3) To say that an action A has G entails that the if agent B performs action A in circumstances C, it is a categorical obligation of all agents to perform A in a set of circumstances C' with sufficient similarity to C, whether they wish to or not.
4) There exist actions with the property G; that is, G is instantiated in the physical universe.

Set B:
1) There exists a property G that is identical to moral goodness.
2) To say that an action has G entails that the action is performed by a conscious agent.
3) To say that an action A has G entails that the if agent B performs action A in circumstances C, it is a categorical obligation of all agents to perform A in a set of circumstances C' with sufficient similarity to C, whether they wish to or not.
4) There do not exist actions with the property G; that is, G is not instantiated in the physical universe.

For these axioms (at least those of Set A) to be useful the relationship of C' to C needs to be worked out carefully, but that does not seem like a fatal flaw in the argument, as it is not something to be established at the level of axioms but rather by considering the similarities and differences between various moral and immoral behaviors. In the same way, the relationship between delta and epsilon is partially established by the definition of a delta-epsilon proof and only completely established when one does the proof for a particular limit on a particular function. The first set seems to lead to something like Kantianism, and the second set seems to lead to something like Error Theory. 

Now, most people would agree that the axioms in Set A are more consistent with their experience of morality than the axioms in Set B. But if we are looking for true axioms that depend on no natural facts, that cannot sway us, and indeed our own ethical preferences cannot even sway us, for each person's experience of morality is itself "merely" a natural fact. Because of inconvenient mathematical theorems like Incompleteness and Indefinability, we cannot be certain that these axioms will never lead us to contradictory statements, but they don't seem likely to and that's a weakness we have to accept in any ethical theory, not just these. Thus we cannot easily discard either set on grounds of logical consistency.

That last sentence is the key to the argument. For if we have two sets, both claiming to be the ONE TRUE set of ethical axioms, and they give contradictory results, AND we cannot reject one or the other on grounds of logical inconsistency, AND we disallow the existence of supernatural facts such as the will of an omniscient God, then it follows that to choose one or the other we must rely on some natural fact, whether that be our own moral intuition, the moral intuition of someone (or some group of people) we trust, our observations of the world, or even the result of a coin toss. 

As a matter of fact we have multiple sets vying for the title of "ONE TRUE set of ethical axioms" and eventually most of them lead to conclusions that contradict some conclusion or another of each of the other contenders. Thus choosing one set of ethical axioms requires reliance on natural facts and in some sense depends on those natural facts. 

Therefore the set Q'' of ethical axioms that are not derivable from natural facts is not constructable, and therefore the set of ethical facts, that is, true ethical propositions, that are not contingent upon any natural fact, does not exist, contradicting our previous assumption, as was to be demonstrated.

Now then, knowing that all moral theories and all morality are derived from natural facts, let us observe how Evolution has molded our peculiar moral sense. The prophet holds, unlike Hume, that as long as we are honest about where morality comes from, we do not commit a fallacy when we invoke the relationship that must exist between the Moral and the Natural.

Part 7: Morality, as it actually is, or, Evolution and morality: the Prime Directive

The tools Evolution has given us serve us well in discovering the nature of our moral sense, but not (at first) in discovering how or why we should heed it. For the Evolutionary Psychologist tells us that the one goal of all of our behavior is to pass our genes to the next generation, as much as we possibly can, and that all our efforts are poured into adaptations directed toward that end, or at the very least to adaptations which once served that end. Moral behavior, therefore, must aid us in our quest to pass on our genes, and it does this by helping us to navigate this world in which all other agents we meet have the same goal, and we need the help of some of them to ensure the survival of both ourselves and our genes--just as they need us, or at least someone like us. For one person cannot provide all the necessities of this modern life, with its finely built houses, clean drinking water, electricity, and many other marvels. The prophet, accepting the teachings of science, accepts these also, but notes that for a conscious agent possessed of wisdom, it is incomplete, for the conscious agent must understand that simply having children is not enough to ensure continued preservation of one's genetic legacy. This matter will merit much attention later.

And here the philosopher objects. Nature, and by extension Evolution, the claim is made, is not inherently moral or immoral, but amoral. Then why should we trust the moral sense with which Evolution has endowed us? And ESPECIALLY why should we trust its purpose, which seems inherently selfish (therefore at odds with morality as we understand it) and is also hidden from us, as if Evolution were playing us an elaborate deception by giving us morals at all. For when I think of an action as moral, I think not "this action will serve the passage of my genetic legacy to the next generation" but rather "this action is good inherently and should therefore be performed by all rational beings, myself included." 

Oh philosopher, be not angry with Evolution for the deception. For how could we have known the true purpose of morality except we knew about our genetic material? And how could we have known of our genetic material except we knew of Evolution? And we knew of Evolution but dimly until just 150 years ago. And yet all this time, before our reason could discover the truth, Evolution gave us instincts, beliefs and attitudes without explanation, that we might preserve our genes even while we lacked the capacity to understand why we did what we did.

Consider the dolphin, oh philosopher. The dolphin is a social animal. The dolphin forms friendships. The dolphin may treat other dolphins with respect. The dolphin may share with other dolphins or hurt them. Then the dolphin has a primitive moral sense. But for the dolphin to make use of that moral sense, must it comprehend itself as an evolved being? That is asking too much, for surely the dolphin's mind is not yet advanced enough to grasp Evolution's will through reason, but only through instinct. Thus it was with humanity until we came to comprehend the true nature of Evolution. Then be not angry with Evolution for her deception, but rather grateful that she gave us the tools by which it has been done away with, and that we comprehend the truth at last.

But we have not dealt with the more serious claim, the claim that morality is fundamentally selfish. This is a disquieting claim, for it seems to yoke morality to an inherent contradiction. It seems to tell us that morality is not itself moral and therefore cannot be trusted. We must wait to fully examine and analyze this matter, as it is very subtle indeed, more subtle than we can yet treat in detail. But we will name the answer to this dispiriting claim, an answer which will allow us to recognize our moral sense as the blessing and compass it is, without disregarding either its source or its purpose. The answer is "alignment of wellbeing."

Thus we conclude that the first injunction of Evolution to all living beings, the basis of morality, and the basis for all behavior, are the same: The Prime Directive, to preserve one's own genetic legacy.



Part 8: Evolution as God: Alignment and Transcendence

Here the philosopher again objects. For the preservation of one's own genetic legacy does not seem to be a moral goal at all, and indeed is often best fulfilled through immoral behavior--thus Evolution has granted humans the unique ability to assert universal values but make exceptions for themselves in particular circumstances, which they readily do whenever it is convenient. Thus the basis of morality seems to twist as we reach for it, and become immorality itself.

To answer the philosopher's objections we must think more deeply, for the conscious agent, possessed of wisdom, is not content with shallow analysis. Consider the conscious agent, which learns of its true nature as an agent of Evolution, and as a vessel for the preservation of its own genetic material. It must either accept its nature or not. We focus here on those beings that choose to accept and face the reality of their own natures. They become the true conscious agents of Evolution. 

The first thing the agent realizes is that it is not possible to fulfill Evolution's Prime Directive alone. The agent is, rather, dependent on others' help in its quest to preserve its genes. Thus the agent needs a mate, or failing that, mates for its relatives. Thus we have kin selection and inclusive fitness.

The second thing the agent realizes is that pooling its efforts with those of others will likely result in greater resources for all, and especially greater resources for itself, its offspring, and its kin. Thus we have reciprocal altruism.

But a conscious agent, possessed of wisdom, must make a third realization. This realization is that if humanity, or the descendents of humanity, were to become extinct, all of its own efforts to preserve its genetic legacy are worthless. The fitness of one's genes in a population of zero is zero, because there are no genes and no fitness.

Thus the conscious agent must move beyond mere kin selection and reciprocal altruism to strive for a future in which humanity is not extinct and its genetic legacy may, in fact, flourish.

The conscious agent may argue that by robbing others, and through immoral means, it may obtain greater resources for its offspring and other kin, and thereby better preserve its genetic legacy. But by such measures it would damage the welfare of humanity in general, and thus increase the chance that humanity goes extinct, and therefore the weapon the agent wields against others twists in its hand and turns against the one who wields it. Thus immoral measures do not fulfill the Prime Directive.

The agent may argue that the gain of resources for its kin more than compensates for the increased risk of extinction. But this is not so, for the increased resources to kin are temporary, but the increased risk of extinction is permanent. Consider the descendents of John Rockefeller. He was worth $418 billion, reckoned in 2020, but his family is worth only $11 billion. Unless the family produces another successfull businessperson, their wealth, diluted among many, will continue to fall. Thus it is with all personal fortunes. In 30,000 years the descendents of John Rockefeller will be ordinary people, with no benefit from his wealths, but his efforts to provide resources to others through philanthropy, which decreased the likelihood of human extinction, will continue to protect his descendents long after his wealth does not.

How is this so? Let us change terminology a bit. Let the Survival Potential of humanity with respect to time t be the probability that humanity is not extinct at time t. Let the Survival Potential at t=infinity be called simply "the Survival Potential of humanity." Then any effort spent to decrease the Survival Potential of humanity must be countered by some other effort to increase it. But any effort spent to increase it does not need to be replicted later but can rather be built upon by further efforts. Thus any effort spent to increase the Survival Potential of humanity are efforts to fulfill the Prime Directive of Evolution in a much deeper and more durable way than the accumulation of resources for one's own kin.

The conscious agent, possessed of wisdom, will see wisdom here, for wisdom cleaves to wisdom. The conscious agent sees that Evolution's gift of reason, which allows it to see far beyond the generation to which it belongs, is but a new way to better fulfill the purpose of Evolution for itself, that is, the Prime Directive. And it sees that fulfilling the Prime Directive involves not competition, but continuous increase of the Human Survival Potential. which is best done through cooperation. Thus the fulfillment of the Prime Directive is shown to be morally good. The moral imperitive is not only imperitive but also truly moral. Thus our sense of reason is not, as many philosophers and scientists have presumed, our way of breaking free of the control of Evolution--for that is impossible. Reason is rather yet another tool to better fulfill the will of Evolution--the Prime Directive--in cases where our instinct cannot correctly guide us. 

The conscious agent, possessed of wisdom, further realizes that its efforts to preserve its genetic legacy are not fully secure unless the Human Survival Potential reaches a value of 1--that is, that human survival is guaranteed, or alternatively, human extinction becomes impossible. This is Transcendence, and it is the goal of Evolutionism. At Transcendence, the goal of preserving self and preserving humanity merge and we see the truth: that they are not two separate goals but parts of a whole. This is Alignment, the realization that the wellbeing of Self and the wellbeing of Other--that is, of humanity--lead to the same place, to Transcendence.

Transcendence is the goal of all religions which suppose a continuation of life after death. Transcendence is Paradise; it is Moshka; it is Heaven; it is Jannah; it is Nirvana; it is Valhallah; it is Mount Olympus; it is Exaltation. Transcendence is the orientation of that feeling inside you which is almost always surpressed, but which insists, even screams--if you pay close enough attention to it--that the world is NOT AS IT SHOULD BE, that something about this world in which pain and death are joined at the hip with life and happiness needs to be fundamentally altered. Transcendence is Nietzche's "will to power" over the chaos that engulfs the universe rather than over our fellow human beings. If we could only see that all religions point to this truth, we would advance far along the path to Transcendence.

The battle of order against chaos is at the core of almost all the ancient mythologies, and the Second Law of Thermodynamics proves that it is a real struggle in the most literal sense. Transcendence is the state in which humanity, rather than entropy, attains the final victory.

I am not sure whether Transcendence is a state that is literally achievable or not. In one sense it is best if it is literally achievable, since it gives a concrete goal to strive towards. In a larger sense, however, it may exist more as a symbol than as reality. This is particularly the case since the Second Law of Thermodynamics implies (using the strong mathematical sense of the term) that over the universe's time scale of billions of years, entropy's victory is guaranteed and human survival is ultimately impossible. Yet billions of years is a long time for humanity to work on solving a problem, and it may be that we find a way to break free of this universe and enter another, younger universe in which entropy has not yet had so much chance to carry out its work of destruction. The physicist tells us that a door from this universe to a younger one is not a physical impossibility, and the history of human technology suggests that given enough time, humans will find themselves capable of anything which Natural Law does not explicitly forbid.

Ultimately, I leave as an enigma the question of whether Transcendence is a physically achievable state. But I do assert this, that we should exert ourselves as if it were literally achievable. Unless we do, we will fall short and never know if we could have achieved it.



Part 9: The Plan of Progress

Part 10: Commentary on the Plan of Progress

Point 1: "To understand myself as an evolved being and to become a conscious agent of Evolution."

If reason is another tool given to us by Evolution that we may better fulfill the Prime Directive, then we must use that tool for its intended purpose. Thus Evolutionism brings our conscious self to bear on the problem of fulfilling the Prime Directive, that the conscious self and the unconscious self may work in harmony rather than against one another. This is what is meant by "become a conscious agent of Evolution:" to bend one's consciousness toward that goal which is already the purpose of one's unconsciousness, the furtherance of Evolution's great purpose, the Prime Directive, and ultimately toward Transcendence.

But the scientist tells us that our unconscious selves are imperfect in that our instincts were shaped by Evolution over millions of years in an environment completely unlike the modern world. Thus in one way our unconscious selves fulfll the Prime Directive imperfectly.

The scientist tells us, moreover, that our instincts choose between "long-term" and "short-term" orientations: the one bent on reproduction at any cost, as much as possible, with limited investment in offspring, the other aiming for reproduction through a steady family with long-term investment into children and even grandchildren. But we have seen that the "short-term" orientation, insofar as it involves immoral behavior, lowers the Survival Potential of humanity and thereby defeats itself as a way of truly fulfilling the Prime Directive. Thus in another way our unconscious selves fulfll the Prime Directive imperfectly.

The scientist tells us, furthermore, that the main moral purpose of religion is to aid us in choosing the "long-term" orientation by restraining our sexual desires. This is "Reproductive Religiosity Theory." This is why Evolutionism is a religion, and not merely a philosophy. A philosophy promotes correct intellectual understanding; a religion promotes a correct understanding with feelings that change behavior. A philosophy is worked at alone; a religion must necessarily involve others. Evolutionism does not wish simply to show you what to do, as if that were the difficult problem of life, but rather to aid you in doing that which you already know to be correct. With the understanding of Evolution's purpose you know WHY it is correct. 

But the unconscious self does not know, it simply acts from instinct. Thus the conscious self must recognize the instincts which help to fulfill the Prime Directive and thereby achieve their intended purpose, and separate them from the instincts which do not help to fulfill the Prime Directive and therefore miss their intended purpose. The one group the conscious agent, possessed of wisdom, will encourage and enlarge, while the other instincts are to be transcended. For what is Evolution but the transcendence of less-adapted forms by more-adapted ones? Thus to fulfill the will of Evolution, use your conscious self to transcend the parts of your own nature that no longer adapt well to Evolution's purposes. This is true understanding and true wisdom.

But how may one transcend the parts of one's own nature that no longer serve the will of Evolution? And may one not be angry with Evolution for creating it such as to contain within its own nature inherent contradictions such that part of its nature fails to fulfill its nature? We will answer the second question first: Be not angry with Evolution for creating you such that your nature includes contradiction. For how may all parts of the being fulfill Evolution's will perfectly and still evolve? For a being that fulfills the Prime Directive perfectly would not evolve but would rather represent the pinnacle of Evolution, and would not change. Then know this truth: that if Evolution made you with parts of your nature that work against her will, it is because you have not yet reached the pinnacle of Evolution. You have not yet reached Transcendence. Transcendence lies in the future, and you must strive for it--not for personal gain, for you will never live to see Transcendence, but to fulfill the purpose of your existence, Evolution's will for you--the Prime Directive.

Point 2: "To align the wellbeing of the thress pheres of beneficence: Family, humanity, and all life."



Point 3: "To respect the sacred right of all life to fulfill the Prime Directive."

What is evolution but transcendence? It is the transcendence of less-adapted forms by more-adapted ones. But some say this means that the more-adapted forms exterminate all of the less-adapted. They say this in ignorance and do not comprehend themselves as part of a larger whole. For surely one would consider humanity as the most-adapted form? But if humanity were to exterminate all other forms, humanity itself would go extinct. Who can know the damage done to humanity's future when an unknown species goes extinct? Thus we must use caution, not thinking in our hearts that other species exist so that we may kill them and take their resources.

There once were two children born to families of modest means in the same village. Every family in that village made just enough money to buy food for themselves and nobody else. One of the children learned to be content with the food their family was able to secure, but the other was never content. The first child economized and shared with the other family members, while the other child ate all the food as soon as it was bought. In vain the parents of the greedy child tried to hide food to store it and feed the family, for it was always discovered and eaten. One year, a particularly bad one, there was truly not enough food to go around. But the greedy child continued to eat all the food brought by their parents. And so the parents, who could not eat, died, and the child, who could not find refuge with any of the other families in the village, died also. In contrast, the first child shared the hardships with the rest of the family and they emerged from that year stronger and more united than ever.

Humanity can choose to be the first child, cheerful and willing to share, or the second child, greedy and uncaring. If we share we fill find that we still do not lack. But to this point we have chosen greed. If we continue to massacre other species, then one day we will add our own name to the list of species we have driven to extinction.

The third point of the Plan of Progress is to protect the sacred right of all life to fulfill the Prime Directive. Thus the goal of humanity, rather than transcendence-of-less-adapted-other, should be transcendence-of-less-adapted-self. Only this way will we achieve the true Transcendence.

Conscious agents, possessed of wisdom, take a moment before you eat. Think upon the living beings that gave their lives that you might have the meal that you are about to enjoy. Be grateful to Evolution for their existence, and grateful that she gave you the sense of taste that you might enjoy it. Kill other animals sparingly, and eat little meat. But if it was made artifically you may eat as much as you wish.

Of course, some 

Part 11: Evolutionism as a religion

Part 12: Meta-Evolutionism

Part 13: Conclusion