An evolutionary and religious view of ethics

"This is right. That is wrong." We all heard those and similar sentences from our parents thousands of times while growing up. 


One of the roles of religion is to give voice to our unreflective beliefs and to validate them even when they don't seem to be rational or grounded in reason. There is a reason that religious people sometimes describe their faith as having its own sort of logic. They are correct; while our consciousness can't perceive the reasons we feel deeply in certain ways, feeling in those ways helps us to better fulfill the Prime Directive. That is the logic behind why we believe in a power higher than humanity, in judgment of souls, etc. Not only that, it's why the religious are convinced that their religiousness brings purpose to their lives. They are correct; fulfilling the Prime Directive is, in the most literal sense, their raison d'etre. Family values ensure that they fulfill the purpose of life. 

Our ethics are one set of unreflective beliefs that religion helps give voice to. Modern philosophy has done a good job of convincing many people that ethics are not objective statements about the universe, but religion asserts otherwise. Religion asserts that God(s) created the universe in such a way that it is best for people to act in some ways but not others.

Seen from an evolutionary point of view, ethics are statements about the society that would best facilitate our preferred strategy for fulfilling the Prime Directive. They are statements that "It would best help my genes enter the next generation if all people behaved like X" or "It would best help ensure the long-term survival of my genetic legacy if society permitted behaior Y but not behavior Z." 

When put this way, it makes ethics seem just like preferences or conventions, but there really is more to it than that. If that were the end of the story, there would be an infinitude of different preferences, or at least as many preferences as there are human cultures. In reality, many things about ethics (though not all by any means) are constant across cultures. There is a considerable amount of scientific research to back this up. One thing we know is that Evolution optimizes relentlessly for fulfilling the Prime Directive, so even if we can't explain all the mechanisms yet, we must conclude that their are some sets of human behaviors that really do help all human beings fulfill the Prime Directive better than others. 

We are back to the religious view after all, then. There really are correct ways of acting in the sense that those ways simultaneously help all those who adopt them to preserve their souls, their genetic legacy, thereby fulfilling Evolution's Prime Directive. These ways of acting are enforced, even more than by human beings, by the most powerful being in the universe, or at least a power so much higher than humanity that we could not escape from her no matter what we do. We know the name of God. It is Evolution.

