Important arguments:

Argument for naturalism: EVERYTHING is a part of nature, including human beings and our brains and consciousness.

Argument from axioms: Since axioms (unproven assumptions) undergirding morality are determined based on human desires that we don't fully understand but have reason to believe were implanter by natural selection/evolution, <i>Evolution has taught us morality.</i> Our moral sense is essentially determined by Evolution.

Argument about the teleology of Evolution: Evolution's goal is to promote the maximum survival of replicated information (currently in the form of DNA). She accomplishes this goal by trying lots of things and seeing what works.

Argument about alignment of incentives: This is an important one. Incentives to contribute to individual vs group welfare. Ultimately the Prime Driective applies directly to individuals; however, individuals in social species need to function in groups. Moral codes generally are about directing individuals to act in the ways that the group judges will promote its welfare (meaning that the consensus of the individuals who make upt the group--possibly weighted according to the prestige of each individual rather than giving each opinion equal weight--is that a certain set of actions are necessary to keep the group functioning well and these actions are morally good). If individuals and the group had the same incentives then individuals would never actively harm the group to further their self-interest. In the short term incentives are not aligned and individuals may focus on themselves and their kin at the expense of the wider group; in the long term incentives ARE aligned because the individual's descendents will become homogeneously mixed into the group and any temporary advantage in resources the individual bequeaths their own kin or descendents will be dispersed and fade away. This is always true if we consider the group in question as all of humanity. THEREFORE: in the long term, the best way to ensure your own genetic legacy survives and prospers is to ensure that humanity in general survives and prospers, as long as everyone else is doing the same. <i>The previous sentence is what Evolutionism as an institution is all about.</i>

Objection to the argument about alignment of incentives: That in the short term the individual's interest is always for itself and its kin rather than that of the group.

Rebuttal to the objection: The short term is important in cases where one can reasonably expect a severe shortage of resources in the near future. This was the case for most of human history, but it's less and less true today. Humanity in general will prosper more in a high-resource-availability environment when long-term, rather than short-term thinking, is nurtured. Then we can do things like use our resources to solve problems like climate change, massive asteroid impacts, etc., before they start causing mass misery and threaten to drive us to extinction.

Further development of the rebuttal: One of the most important aspects of Evolution is that it TRANSCENDS maladaptive parts of the gene pool (revealed in maladaptive phenotypes) by altering them through mutations. It is the point of view of Evolutionism that the short-term focus that causes us to value the welfare of ourselves and our children NOW, rather than the welfare of other generations to come, is now maladaptive. It is a part of our nature we need to transcend, and in doing so we will find that we and our children will also be better off.

Argument that Evolution is God: First, Evolution has put humans under a moral law that our societies must follow in order to function (see Christakis: Blueprint, 2019). Therefore she is a giver of commandments or moral law. Second, Evolution has ultimate authority and power to enforce her moral law, with her ultimate punishment being extinction. Third, Evolution has shown humanity the path to a morally GOOD end, Trancendence. Transcendence is the state in which it is impossible for humanity or our descendents to go extinct. After all, from the point of view of a species, adaption or extinction are the only choices Evolution allows for. Therefore Evolution has both ultimate power and moral authority and by virtue of those attributes deserves our worship, where by worship I mean our highest allegiance. She also deserves our obedience to her Prime Directive, which is to preserve our genetic legacy.

Argument for the Plan of Progress: The Plan of Progress is Evolutionism's set of core values and principles to help each individual fulfill the Prime Directive for her or himself while serving the needs of humanity (which again, in the long term, are the same as the needs of the individual). (Point 2 and value 2: Moral goodness/alignment of incentives.) The individual is therefore directed to make a contribution towards Transcendence (point 5 and value 5) and also help others to do the same where possible. The Plan of Progress also recognizes that Evolution's ultimate purpose is to preserve replicating information, which she does through ALL LIFE, not just humanity. Should humanity ultimately fail to achieve Transcendence, we should make sure that we haven't destroyed all other life that might have replaced us and it is therefore our duty to not harm other life insofar as it is possible (point 4/value 4: Respect for life). Evolutionism considers it self-evident that one of the most important ways to preserve humanity is by bearing children and raising them well (value 3/ point 3: Family). Finally, Evolutionism considers its teachings important in the sense that people who know what their goal is and how human nature might help or hinder that goal are actually in a better position to achieve that goal than people who are ignorant of these realities. Therefore the remaining value of Evolutionism and the Plan of Progress is Truth, especially understanding of the self and the human condition (value 1/ point 1: Truth).

Argument that Transcendence is the highest moral good: First, let it be accepted that alignment of incentives is the fundamental moral problem. NEED TO DEVELOP THIS CORRECTLY.