I am a religious dissident. I was raised a member of a particular conservative denomination of Christianity and eventually decided for myself that not only was my worldview metaphysically suspect--in other words, it called into existence beings that there weren't really very good evidence for on the basis of a history that we have VERY good evidence to believe is mostly false--but also morally wrong. Since that decision I have revised my description of my former worldview to "metaphysically suspect and morally lacking," because actually there were a lot of good moral nuggets in there that were hard to see when I was in the angry phase of apostasy. 

After leaving my old beliefs I, like so many others, began a lifelong quest for Truth with a capital T. One of the first lessons I learned on that quest was that one finds the Divine where one looks for the Divine. I certainly found the Divine in all five the "Big Five" world religions (Buddhism, Hinduism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam) and also in Spinoza, Kant, and a few other philosophers. I did NOT find the current secular attitude of "the Divine is not present in conservative Christianty, therefore it is not present anywhere" to be a tenable life philosophy; I consider that line of reasoning a failing of secular culture.

Finally, after finding the Divine almost everywhere I looked, I asked myself if it were possible to find the Divine among things that I could be almost as certain of as my own existence; namely, the conclusions we get from modern science about the origins of the universe and humanity. To my own surprise, and contrary to almost all of what I read, the answer what not only yes, but a resounding "YES" that was so deep it was like finding the source of divinity itself. It was then that I knew I would found a religion or die trying.

I tell you this to provide context for what I'm about to say, rather than to mythologize my own life. Mythologizing my own life is the last thing I want to do. I'm not even sure I qualify as meeting the relatively low bar for a "good person." But I do seem to be the only one to have peered into the cosmic abyss and seen Natural Law, the one God, and its incarnation Evolution, Goddess of Creation and Life, given stewardship and moral authority over humanity. Therefore I have a duty to share it with humanity whether I like it or not. I am Evolution's prophet, in the proper sense we see prophets in the Hebrew Bible: While peering into the future is part of what I do, the more important part of what I do is to announce Evolution's will to humanity. As Jeremiah said, "his word is in my heart like a fire, a fire shut up in my bones. I am weary of holding it in; indeed, I cannot." (Jeremiah 20:9, NIV)

The message I come bearing to humanity is this: Evolution is the Goddess of Creation and of Life. The anthropomorphic representation of her as a Goddess is simply metaphor, but a useful one. She is a Goddess on the basis of her existence independent of humanity, and of her ultimate authority to enforce her commands. Her Prime Directive, issued to all life, everywhere, is to preserve one's genetic legacy. Those who willfully ignore the Prime Directive pay the ultimate price: extinction. 

But Evolution's authority as a deity resides in something more subtle and worship-worthy than raw power, or even than her having created humanity. Evolution has a moral authority over humanity that even most philosophers and scientists have not yet realized. For when one considers the problem of fulfilling the Prime Directive over the long term rather than simply over one's own lifespan, it becomes clear that the model of Evolution we learned in school, with its overemphasis on competition, "nature red in tooth and claw," is inadequate. If we are really to preserve our genetic legacy, it is first necessary to preserve humanity in general. We must align our own Survival Potential with that of our entire species. And if we take Evolution seriously as our Goddess we will respect the fact that, aside from the considerable interweaving of our Surivival Potential with that of all life, Evolution's grand project, rather than humanity as such, is to better adapt each living species to its environment, or in other words, to increase the Survival Potential of all life. We will therefore interefere with that project as little as possible.

Evolution, in other words, now that our God-given gifts of reason and intuition have unmasked her as the gift-giver, points us to the ultimate purpose for our moral sense (which she has also given us; see: Evolutionary Psychology), namely, the alignment of the wellbeing of three Spheres of Beneficence: family, humanity, and all life.

If we achieve perfect alignment of the Survival Potential of the three Spheres of Beneficence, we can achieve what I call Transcendence. Transcendence is like heaven on Earth, or heaven manifested in the physical universe. It is the state in which life in general, and humanity (or more likely our descendents) in particular, cannot possibly go extinct. This may sound farfetched to those accustomed to thinking that the Second Law of Thermodynamics implies that over the VERY long term human survival will be impossible. But what the Second Law really implies is that over the long term human survival in a closed system like this universe is impossible. Were we to invent a way to travel to some other universe, which is certainly difficult but not impossible according to our current understanding of physics, we could survive indefinitely despite the Second Law. It is uncertain whether we will in fact ever find a way to leave our universe, or if Trancendence is a physically achievable state. Even if it is not, it is the goal Evolution has given us to strive for, and strive we must. Personally, I believe we will in fact find a way to leave our universe and that Transcendence is literally achievable, but what I am saying is that it's not fatal to Evolutionism as a religion if I'm wrong.

Finally, I apologize. I intended to produce a complete religious system, with at least a first draft of sacred texts and rituals. If this paragraph is included, I have died before achieving that goal, and my sister who I appointed guardian of these files has followed my instructions to ensure they reach the rest of humankind. I leave you with this thought: Follow the Plan of Progress, and you can and will achieve Transcendence. Evolution has given you all the tools and determination you will need.

