**Last edited: May 1, 2021**

Organization of Evolutionism

I do not conceive of Evolutionism as "one religion" in the same way that, for instance, Roman Catholicism or the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints should be thought of as "one religion" but rather in the way that Christianity as a whole, or Hinduism as a whole, or Buddhism as a whole, or Islam as a whole could each be thought of as "one religion." Therefore I expect Evolutionism to ultimately become almost a meta-religion in the sense that it will consist of various groups with different rituals and beliefs with the Prime Directive and the Plan of Progress at their center.

At the very least I would like to see five different schools of Evolutionism. The first four schools would each emphasize one of the pillars or principles of the Plan of Progress:
 1) The Human-Evolutionist school, emphasizing the first pillar (Understand Yourself) which seeks full realization of one's own potential through practical psychology
 2) The Familial-Evolutionist school, emphasizing the second pillar (Participate in the Bearing and Raising of the Next Generation) which seeks to aid individuals and families as they raise and train children, and more generally to help human beings relate well to one another
 3) The Altruistic-Evolutionist school, emphasizing the third pillar (Reduce Human Suffering; Increase Human Happiness) which emphasizes humanitarian service and "peace on Earth, goodwill to humanity."
 4) The Progressize-Evolutionist school, emphasizing humanity's march towards Transcendence through biological, social, and technological change, and helping people deal with the consequences of those changes

Fianlly, I would hope there could be a fifth school:
 5) The Mystical-Evolutionist school, emphasizing communion with Evolution through such practices as meditiation. It would derive a lot from existing monastic traditions, with the goal being to better study the subjective experiences of the mind that our evolutionary heritage grants us. You could think of this school as "the study of the God that exists inside you," since Evolution quite literally has left her legacy in every facet of our bodies and minds.

However, all the schools of Evolutionism should appoint members to a Grand Council that should meet at least yearly. (They should be given members proportional to the number of adherents who identify them.) The purpose of this council would be to establish clearly the basic criteria of what Evolutionism IS, and even more importantly, what it is NOT. It should also serve the purpose, which is equally important with the establishment of positive and negative doctrine, of ensuring regular communication between the leaders of the different schools.

I don't want to dictate the minutiae of what the Grand Council will be doing at its yearly conferences, but I do want to give an idea of what I mean by affirming what Evolutionism is and is not. 

The Grand Council should pass resolutions, which must be approved by at least 60% of its members including at least one member from each school, either affirming or disavowing a particular principle. In addition, they will occasionally need to pass resolutions on the weightier matter of disavowing particular groups of people who claim to be Evolutionist but have adpoted at least one principle that is fundamentally incompatible with Evolutionism (examples would be the denial that humanity evolved at all, or espousing racism or genocide). These resolutions should pass with 65% including at least one member from each school.

It may occur that some of the people needing to be disavowed come from the leadership of one of the schools and that therefore the resolution cannot pass with votes from that school. In this case the resolution may still pass with 65% of the votes and at least one member of each of the remaining schools. If more than one school is implicated, I think that would result in a schism in the Grand Council itself and the creation of two religions (in the same sense, for instance, that Baha'i is a separate religion from Islam). I might, however, be wrong about this. In any case I doubt that a resolution to dissolve the leadership of multiple schools at once could pass a vote at the thresholds I have set even if the requirement for one member from each school is removed, so the Grand Council would have to split in that case. I think the final judge of that dispute would be Evolution herself, acting through the weight of popular and historical opinion as the years pass.

The Institute for the Study of the Future of Humanity
