**Last edited: Dec. 3, 2021**

The daily meditiation

I worship Evolution, Goddess of Creation, Goddess of Life. I fulfill her Prime Directive, to preserve my genetic legacy, by living the Plan of Progress and its principles.

First, to seek and understand truth.
Second, to show respect, compassion, and love to all living beings.
Third, to strive for Transcendence.

Through these principles I fulfill the purpose for which Evolution created me and find meaning in life.

The Prime Directive

To preserve my genetic legacy.

The Plan of Progress (a set of principles designed to help best fulfill the Prime Directive)

1) To seek and understand truth
2) To show respect, compassion, and love towards all living beings
3) To strive for Transcendence

Commentary
What is meant by seeking and understanding truth?

Truth is simply that which is true. But the seeking of truth in the Plan of Progress is to seek and understand that truth which enables us to more fully fulfill the Prime Directive. 

Human consciousness and reason is the most powerful tool Evolution has ever created, because it frees humanity from operating purely under instinct. So the Plan of Progress, and Evolutionism more generally, are about bringing human consciousness, this most powerful of tools, more fully to bear on the problem it was created to solve: the preservation of the genetic legacy of humanity. To better perform this task, our consciousness needs true information about this world, that we may better survive within it. We need true information about ourselves, that we may better understand our weaknesses and possible blind spots which prevent us from fulfilling the Prime Directive. That is what is meant by "seek truth."

The understanding of truth is focused on the sort of understanding that is not merely intellectual, but changes our behavior; indeed, this understanding should really change our nature as human beings (thus enabling us to better meet the second and third points of the Plan of Progress). Thus, this understanding takes place through intellectual exercise, but also through ritual, through social interactions, through actual practice and experience of the principles we know are true, through calm reflection, etc. This "super-intellectual" understanding is commonly known as "wisdom," and this is what the term "wisdom" means in the Evolutionist canon.

So, fulfilling the first point of the Plan of Progress will require at least the following:
 - Academic knowledge about reality (sciences)
 - Knowledge about ourselves and our nature (psychology)
 - Ritual and social appliactions of that knowledge (religion)

These things lead to the real goal, wisdom. The ritual and social element distinguishes Evolutionism from philosophy and makes it truly a religion.


What is meant by showing respect, compassion, and love to all living beings?

No religion to date has been more exemplary at teaching the second point of the Plan of Progress than Buddhism. Buddhists vow never to harm any living being. They would not squish an insect. They would not pluck a flower. They would not kill weeds.

Now, it is not possible to go through life and never harm another living being. For all that we eat was once living, so to truly not harm any other living being would entail starving oneself to death. Furthermore, (almost) all disease is caused by living pathogens which must be killed 



We strive for Transcendence in four ways:

 - Performing acts of service to other people and other living beings
 - Participating in the bearing and raising of the next generation
 - Increasing the knowledge and tools available to humanity
 - Inviting other agents to become conscious of their agency
