**Last edited: Jul. 11 2021**

One of the most important difficulties we have in convincing people of the truth of Evolutionism is what I call the "obvious interpretation." Obvious interpretation of what? Of the creation story of science.

Let's run through the story quickly. Approximately 13 billion years ago the universe exploded/inflated into being for unknown reasons. After a cooling period the massive energy from the cosmic inflation period began for into matter which clumped into galaxies. Why matter? Apparently the ratio of matter to antimatter formed in the early universe was one and one billionth to one. That's right, all the matter we observe in the universe is that extra one billionth that didn't have any antimatter to annihilate it.

While the galaxies were clumping, individual stars were also clumping together from dispersed gases. These stars clumped so tightly that they actually force their component gases close together. Really close together, like clost enough to jumpstart a fusion reactor close together. So the stars became giant fusion reactors, and when they ran out of fuel for that, the biggest ones collapsed in massive explosions which created the higher elements (basically anything higher than carbon). 

Much later on, some of these higher elements coalesced in a body around an ordinary yellow star in the backwater regions of an ordinary galaxy called the Milky Way, and formed a planet we call Earth. This planet was special for 2 reasons: first, it was a rocky planet that wasn't too big or too small, in a region that wasn't too close or too far from its star (i.e. could have liquid water present) and second, it was hit by a large asteriod which started a permanent magnetic dynamo deep in its core. As a result of this, Earth is capable of sustaining an atmosphere, unlike Mars and many other similarly sized planets.

Eventually the liquid water that Earth's distance, elemental composition, and atmosphere enabled provided a medium that jumpstarted several chemical reactions leading to the formation of primitive building blocks of life (probably RNA first). The RNA eventually found its way into phospholipid layers, made friends with amino acids, etc, etc, and then was outdone by DNA which could replicate itself better once it had the chemical machinery available to do so. Thus the process of evolution by natural selection was begun, and it has continued unabated until the present day. It has produced, among other things, flowers, dung beetles, and us. It produces things simply by replicating the things that are better at replicating themselves, and occasionally making mistakes. When the mistake turns out to be a helpful one, it replicates better and eventually takes over the "nonmistakes."

This is great science, but as literature it has a major flaw. 

What is the purpose of life?

First, let's ask what we mean by purpose. It's actually a very difficult word to define. I actually can't think of a definition that doesn't make recourse to some equally undefinable word like "meaning." 

I can, however, say some things about what I expect from the purpose of life, so let's start there.

First, I expect to the purpose of life to convince me that all my strivings and sufferings, and the strivings and sufferings of my fellow human beings, are useful for something. Second, I expect it to convince me of this on multiple levels at once. I expect to be convinced intellectually, so that I can actually feel honest about wanting to strive for something in life even if the striving is sometimes painful. I further expect to be convinced emotionally, so that I do in fact WANT to keep striving. 

The "something" for which my strivings are useful needs to be REAL, and also needs to have significant emotional impact. It needs to be significant enough that it seems even to transcend the emotions that I feel on a daily basis--enough that although it IS fundamentally emotional, emotion seems like a poor word for it. I think that this higher sort of emotion is what people in my old tradition, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, mean by the word "spiritual."

In my judgment, secularism is terrible at either finding the purpose of life or communicating that purpose clearly enough to have an emotional impact, and that's why it has failed so completely to replace religion. The genius of Evolutionism is to find an actual "purpose for life" in the apparently purposeless creation story of humanity as supplied by modern science. That purpose of life is what we call Transcendence.

To understand Transcendence, first think of the ultimate fate of the human species. It must be extinction, right? After all, evolution is sort of life an arcade game. You can get a higher and higher score, survive for longer and longer, but eventually you make a mistake or a series of them, and it's "game over". You're just trying to survive for as long as possible. How do you "win" a game that only ends when you lose?

The answer is simple: You make it impossible to lose, or equivalently, you make it impossible for the game to end. THAT is Transcendence: making the extinction of humanity an impossible event. 

Even for the most selfish among us, Transcendence serves as a "purpose of life." After all, even if you care only about the survival of your own children/descendents, you have to admit that BY DEFINITION, if humanity goes extinct, your descendents didn't survive. That, by the way, is why you "should be good," in the sense of acting as if the survival of all humanity was your ultimate goal, even if you don't happen to want to.

Beliefs relfective vs nonreflective
https://www.edge.org/response-detail/27009
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25948700/
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33130329/
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30199770/
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22481051/
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23848383/
http://cogprints.org/402/1/beliefs.htm
https://www.jstor.org/stable/44318678?seq=1#metadata_info_tab_contents
