Evolution, the Prime Directive, and Family

"In stable environments with abundant access to resources and trustworthy mates, more effort can be allocated to parenting with higher potential for reproductive success through focus on the quality of offspring. In unstable environments with fewer resources and transient mating opportunities, more effort is allocated to mating with reproductive success more closely aligned with the potential quantity of offspring because environmental instability makes focus on offspring quality less reproductively profitable." - Van Slyke and Szocik, "Sexual selection and religion: Can the evolution of religion be explained in terms of mating strategies?" Archive for the Psychology of Religion2020, Vol. 42(1) 123–141

"Limiting the amount of offspring reduces the amount of resources necessary for development but places the future of the lineage in a much smaller group of offspring. Interestingly, despite having larger numbers of total offspring, religious children do not appear to have reductions in overall offspring quality based on such measures as health, education, and overall wealth (Shaver et al., 2019). The religious alloparenting hypothesis suggests that the higher levels of cooperation among religious participants engender greater parental support by non-genetically related persons (alloparenting), which reduces the trade-offs between offspring quantity and quality, allowing religious persons to excel at both (Shaver, 2017)." - Van Slyke and Szocik, "Sexual selection and religion: Can the evolution of religion be explained in terms of mating strategies?" Archive for the Psychology of Religion2020, Vol. 42(1) 123–141

Secular culture has a liberal critique of religion that goes more or less like this: Religion is about sex. In particular, it's about the idea that too much sex is dangerous, ESPECIALLY if a woman is doing it. So religion tries to sexually repress people (but especially women). This is apparently an adaptation to serve men's interests to make sure that as they invest resources to raise their children, they're not actually raising someone else's children. This critique seems to gain major strength from a new thoery of religion that has found solid empirical support, the reproductive religiosity theory. Basically, RRT theorizes that religion serves the social purpose of supporting monogamy and the monogamous lifestyle. In order to do that, it offers social resources to help raising children and shuns sexually deviant individuals.

So basically, the patriarchy is real, and religion really does perpetuate it and we should all throw off those old-fashioned ideas and be sexually liberated, right?

Well, the truth is always more complicated than that. One of the major difficulties with the liberal critique is that it ignores an important data point: Women are more religious, on average, than men are. There's a lot of nuance to that statement, but at the end of the day the gender ratio in the pews on Sunday almost always skews female. So any satisfactory account of religion's sexual oppression of women needs to explain why so many women seem to enjoy being sexually repressed.

I think that because the people researching RRT are all liberals who probably embrace this critique of religion to varying degress, the papers on RRT read this way. But it's possible to present the same facts in a way that makes them so obvious to the average churchgoer they'll wonder why a scientific study was even needed to prove them. Imagine, instead of the headline "Religious morality is below the belt" (real opinion piece by a scientist on RRT), the alternate headline "Science confirms it: Religious morality is about family values." Almost all religious people would agree.

Here's the crazy thing: conservative sexual norms ensure a lot of nuclear families. (I know, crazy, right?) Stable nuclear families mean a lot of children raised with considerable investment of time and other resources. ("Science confirms it: religious people have more children.") A lot of children raised with considerable resources (i.e. high investment) is <i>the way to win at evolution.</i> That's right. Religion is teaching people how to increase their Darwinian fitness.

This is why religious people somehow know, even though it makes no logical sense, that their religion is true, that God is really there, and that somehow the Bible/Qur'an/Vedas/Discourses of the Buddha teaches them a higher reality. They are literally correct, though the reality is not quite what they think it is. The reality is that as they follow their religion, they are fulfilling Evolution's Prime Directive. They have really found God's will and they're following it. In so doing they're fulfilling the purpose of life. Evolution is extremely clever, and she has given people a good intuitive sense of what actions and strategies best fulfill the Prime Directive. This intuitive sense is what people invoke when they say they have faith or believe or know that their religion is true.

Those who have opened their eyes to Evolutionary Psychology sometimes resent how it sort of implies that our genes are in control, we're just slaves, the genes are selfish, and therefore we're fundamentally selfish. I definitely resented that when I found out about it. But understood from a different angle, in an intuitive way, the way religious truth is processed, it's totally different. Read it this way:

Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life, has placed humanity under a law called the Prime Directive: Preserve your genetic legacy. Every individual ever created is under that law, and the penalty for breaking it is extinction; the loss of legacy. In fact, Evolution created us that the precious genetic material within us might be preserved and refined. We are the agents of Evolution, entrusted with the task of endowing the next generation with the genetic legacy of our ancestors, with a few contributions of our own in the way of new mutations, new culture, and new tools.

Each person is a beloved, unique agent of Evolution capable of fulfilling the Prime Directive. While not all people have children, all people can fulfill the Prime Directive through the doctrine of Inclusive Fitness, which states that one preserves one's genetic legacy not only through having children but in general by providing resources to one's own kin. In fact, taken to its limit Inclusive Fitness reveals a fundamental truth about morality: that one fulfills the Prime Directive simply by doing good to humanity. For a moment's reflection is enough for anyone to see that if humanity goes extinct, all of our efforts to preserve our own genetic legacies are in vain. Slightly less obvious, but still obvious enough, is the truth that any special advantages we give our offspring are diluted through the generations until eventually they are completely gone, and in the limit of sufficiently long amounts of time the Survival Potential (probability of non-extinction) of our family and the Survival Potential of all humanity are equal. 

Therefore, the precious God/Evolution-given gift of reason has enabled us to solve a problem that our intuitions, as wonderful as they are, could not: the problem of selfishness. For it is by reason that we see that in the long term we secure our own genetic legacies by working for the benefit of humanity, not by selfishness. Therefore increasing our own fitness is good, but increasing our own fitness AND that of all humanity AT THE SAME TIME is better. Morality is Evolution's way of teaching us the latter course of action.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3161130/
https://scholarworks.wm.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=6589&context=etd

There are several reproductive strategies that people use to try to pass their genes on to the next generation, thus fulfilling the Prime Directive within their own sphere of action. One is the religious strategy, the strategy of sexual restraint, enorced monogamy, and traditional family structure. One is the strategy of mating with as many people as possible. This is living for sex and money. A final one is the secular ideal of having a family when possible but placing the sexual enjoyment and other happiness of the parents ahead of fertility.

Now which of these trategies best fufills the Prime Directive? The answer is: the religious strategy, and it's not close. The central finding of the science of religion is that more religious populations have higher average fertility, and the most devoutly religious have the largest families. This is such a well-established finding that secular scientists predict the average religoisity of humanity will increase over the next few centuries as the less-religious choose to have fewer children.

Therefore, there it is futile to fight against religion. Religion will win the war. It must win. The solution is to found a new religion that treats human beings equitably and encourages all to fulfill the Prime Directive--and yes, encourages sexual restraint and traditional families.

Sexual freedom must be sacrificed to fulfill the Prime Directive, but the results of the sacrifice are not sad or evil. They are joyful. For, besides fulfilling the purpose of life, the conscious agent who dedicates their life to Evolution and has a large family experiences an increase of love, avoids the heartbreak caused by sexual unfaithfulness, avoids sexually transmitted infections, and avoids many addictive behaviors which prove destructive to human relationships. Thus, through discipline applied trhough the years of life, the conscious agent learns the truth of this saying of Sri Krishna: "That which seems like poison at first, but tastes like nectar in the end, is said to be happiness in the mode of goodness. It is generated by the pure intellect that is situated in self-knowledge. Happiness is said to be in the mode of passion when it is derived from the contact of the senses with their objects. Such happiness is like nectar at first but poison at the end."

The religious person must always be watchful lest they be seduced by the other strategies. When a religious family becomes a secular family, the religious call this "apostasy." When a religious person changes to the strategy of mating with as many people as possible, the religious call this "yielding to the devil."

The great temptation of liberal culture is to try to cast these strategies as equal in the same way that different races are equal or different sexual orientations are equal. But different mating strategies are NOT equal. One fulfills the Prime Directive much better than others, and in the process saves its adherents a large amount of heartbreak. Thus religion teaches humanity the proper worship of Evolution.