**Last edited: Sept. 29, 2021**

Sacrifice ritual

Bhagavad Gita on sacrifice: (4.26-4.33, 4.36-4.38)

Some yogis [worshippers] worship the celestial gods with material offerings unto them. Others worship perfectly who offer the self as sacrifice in the fire of the Supreme Truth.

Others offer hearing and other senses in the sacrificial fire of restraint. Still others offer sound and other objects of the senses as sacrifice in the fire of the senses.

Some, inspired by knowledge, offer the functions of all their senses and their life energy in the fire of the controlled mind.

Some offer their wealth as sacrifice, while others offer severe austerities as sacrifice. Some practice the eight-fold path of yogic practices, and yet others study the scriptures and cultivate knowledge as sacrifice, while observing strict vows.

Still others offer as sacrifice the outgoing breath in the incoming breath, while some offer the incoming breath into the outgoing breath. Some arduously practice prāṇāyām and restrain the incoming and outgoing breaths, purely absorbed in the regulation of the life-energy. Yet others curtail their food intake and offer the breath into the life-energy as sacrifice. All these knowers of sacrifice are cleansed of their impurities as a result of such performances.

Those who know the secret of sacrifice, and engaging in it, partake of its remnants that are like nectar, advance toward the Absolute Truth. O best of the Kurus, those who perform no sacrifice find no happiness either in this world or the next.

All these different kinds of sacrifice have been described in the Vedas. Know them as originating from different types of work; this understanding cuts the knots of material bondage.

O subduer of enemies, sacrifice performed in knowledge is superior to any mechanical material sacrifice. After all, O Parth, all sacrifices of work culminate in knowledge....

Even those who are considered the most immoral of all sinners can cross over this ocean of material existence by seating themselves in the boat of divine knowledge.

As a kindled fire reduces wood to ashes, O Arjun, so does the fire of knowledge burn to ashes all reactions from material activities.

In this world, there is nothing as purifying as divine knowledge. One who has attained purity of mind through prolonged practice of Yog, receives such knowledge within the heart, in due course of time.


A sacrifice should be made of something truly dear to you. The best sacrifices are of actions that are bad, but that you really enjoy performing anyway. I imagine writing down your sacrifice on paper and burning it at an altar to Evolution, which would be a triangular stone altar. The fire would be lit in a depression in the middle of the altar and at each point there would be a glass orb--one depicting family, one depicting humanity, and one depicting all living creatures--to serve as graphic reminders of the spheres of beneficence. At the end of the ritual you throw your paper into the fire to burn it, and consider that thing burned out of your life and dedicated to Evolution.


I sacrifice <X> for the good of my family. I sacrifice <X> for the good of humanity. I sacrifice <X> for the good of all life. I sacrifice <X> to better fulfill the Prime Directive by transcending self, that I may help to achieve full Transcendence and forever preserve my genetic legacy.

<If sacrificing a wrong action> May the good done by this sacrifice overcome, or diminish, the hurt caused by my previous actions.

Oh Evolution, accept my sacrifice.
