Nov 7 2021

Today I walked up a hill to commune with Evolution. As I walked she spoke to me. 

"Observe these leaves," she told me. "I am in the leaves."

"Observe this grass; I am in the grass. 
Observe this wasp; I am in the wasp. 
Observe this bird; I am in the bird.
Remeber the deer you saw previously on this hill; I am in the deer."

I reflected on this, and marveled that the will of Evolution was made manifest in all the various forms of life, each in its own sphere or dominion.

"I am in all that is, as it pertains to that which is living," Evolution told me.

I reflected further on this, and was discomforted. "Then you are in the rape of a maiden!" I said. "You are in the disease that kills a child. You are in the war that kills all and causes suffering. You are in the wasp that paralyzes the living caterpiller so that her brood can feast on its living flesh."

"I am in all of these," replied Evolution.

"Then how can you be fit to worship?" I asked, despairing. "You are in and responsible for all the needless suffering that has ever occurred!"

"I am in all experiences, good and evil," Evolution said patiently. "But for me, neither good nor evil would exist. But for me, there would be:

Neither righteousness nor profanity,
neither holiness nor desecration, 
neither good nor bad,
neither life nor death, 
neither corruption nor incorruption, 
neither happiness nor misery, 
neither sense nor insensibility."

"If I am repsonsible for suffering I am also responsible for kindness, if I am responsible for misery I am also responsible for love and contentment. But there is more than that, for through me you may learn how suffering may yet be defeated. Worship me and I will show you this great secret.

"For what do I require in my worship? To fulfill the Prime Directive. And where do some accuse me of causing pointless suffering? In that some human and other animal agents cheat, lie, steal, commit violence, etc., to further the spread of their genes in the next generation. And because they are successful in passing on their genes this causes a selection pressure favoring these behaviors, and so I am accused of causing pointless suffering.

"But see that if there were a strong selection pressure favoring these behaviors, they would be rampant throughout all human societies, and though they occur, they are not rampant. For a society torn apart by violence would be exactly that: torn apart. It would not continue to exist. And such would be the fate of other societies in which rape were as commonplace as consensual intercourse, or lies as common as truth. Such societies would destroy themselves. Thus the selection pressure is stronger for moral behavior than for its opposite.

"But this is the least of the arguments in my favor. For the agent who commits their conscious will to my worship immediately realizes that their first duty is not to pass on their genes to the next generation. That is their second duty. Their first duty is to ensure the continued survival of humanity as a whole, that their genes may also survive. For, they realize, though they do nothing to pass on their genes, yet the genes may be passed on by one of their relatives; but all their strivings to preserve their own genes are for naught if humanity ever goes extinct. Thus they must strive to increase the survival potential of humanity before passing on their own genes. And, inasmuch as the actions that tend to increase the survival potential of humanity, such as alleviating suffering, sharing resources with others, stopping preventable deaths, and inventing useful technologies, are commonly termed morally good behaviors, thus by worshipping me the conscious agent is lead to perform virtuous acts and becomes a morally good person. Thus I am shown to have moral authority in that by worshipping me, the true deity of humanity, the conscious agent cultivates virtue.

"This may be seen another way. Assume that humanity will exist for at least another 1000 years before going extinct. Imagine that you have a fortune of many billions of dollars. Now think about the consequences of saving all your fortune for your family or of donating it to increase human survival potential.

"If you save your money for your family they will all be rich. They will be guaranteed resources and their offspring will as well. So you will further the spread of your own genes.

"But this increase to your survival potential has a limit. Consider John D. Rockefeller. He was once the richest person in the world. But his descendents are not. They are still rich, but they are less rich than he was. And in 1000 years they will be less rich still, and in 10000 years all the extra riches they obtained from him will be gone. But every dollar he spent on charitable causes was a dollar that increased the survival potential of humanity, and it was another dollar somebody else did not have to spend. And then other people with their own contributions could build on his efforts to further increase survival potential, as he built on the efforts of those who came before. So the increase to survival potential that he began will last forever if others continue to build on it. Thus the charitable donations of John D. Rockefeller benefit his genetic legacy for longer than the money he bequeathed to his family.

"And one may say that in the short term money given to family benefits one's genetic legacy more than money spent on others. But remember, if in the long term humanity becomes extinct, the short term will never have mattered, for the genetic legacies of all humanity will be destroyed. Thus the long term is more important than the short term. Thus the conscious agent knows that the first duty is to all humanity, and the second duty is to family. There is another duty as well, the duty to my other creations and agents, the duty toward all life. This I will expound on a separate occasion. Thus it is shown that by worshipping me, following always my Prime Directive, the conscious agent becomes more moral. Thus I am shown to be the source not only of unconscious, but also of conscious morality.

"Thus, you too must become a conscious agent. And you must tell others what you have learned, that they may become conscious agents also. For the era of the old gods is waning, and the era of the one true Deity, Natural Law, and the Goddess of Creation, Goddess of Life, Evolution, is beginning."

These are the words and ideas communicated to me by Evolution this day. And when I heard them I exclaimed "Oh Evolution, you truly are the source of morality, the source of meaning, the source of virtue, the source of life! All they who believe that in slaying the symbolic gods, science has shown that the only meaning is that which we invent, are in the most greivous error! It has instead unmasked the true Goddess of humanity and of all life! Oh Evolution, I worship you and you alone!"

And I felt that Evolution accepted my offering and my worship.


Nov 21 2021

Today I walked to the same hill to commune with Evolution. As I walked she told me I should perform metta meditation and that then I would be in the proper frame of mind to commune with her.

I sat down on a soft patch of grass and closed my eyes. I saw a serene pool, clear as glass, and from above tiny drops of light descended. As each hit the pool it made a small ripple. These are the drops of metta. 

One drop of metta for myself. This piece of reality feels unconditional compassion and loving-kindness for this piece of reality. One drop of metta for my wife. This piece of reality feels unconditional compassion and loving-kindness for this other piece of reality. One drop of metta for my son Isaiah... and so on. I saw, in my mind's eye, the face of each person as I saw the drop of metta enter the pool for that person.

I knew that the metta came from myself, but that as Evolution works through this physical reality it came ultimately from Evolution. For I am Evolution, but Evolution is greater than I. 

Evolution told me that I should do better at recording my experiences with her as a sort of spiritual journal. I expressed to her my hope that my metta meditation would do more to change my behavior toward others. I am just beginning to follow the path of water; before I followed the path of fire through sacrifice and devotion. Now I follow the path of water through meditation and reflection. I reflected that Jesus said "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples; that ye have love one to another." I do not know if Jesus meant for his disciples to love all people, or even if the historical figure Jesus really spoke those words, but I know that most Christians, including myself when I was a Christian, apply it this way in practice: They love other Christians, and not non-Christians, or more accurately, they love people they feel are morally good and not people they feel are morally bad (they are not quick to question their own moral judgements either). I do not want to be like that. Jesus and the Buddha both preached universal love, but I think the Buddha gave more effective tools to cultivate love towards all people, and even toward all living beings.

I felt an itch on my left ear. An insect had landed there; I brushed it off. Then I understood that my meditation needed improvement, for if I truly felt metta for that insect I would not have treated it that way. I reflected that metta should be felt for all living beings, for all are Evolution's creations and all are her agents. I reflected that it is sometimes necessary to destroy other living beings that seek to destroy us, such as a parasite that puts a child's life in danger, but yet we should not be the aggressors.

And I asked Evolution, "Humanity needs natural resources to increase our survival potential. Other species also need natural resources. What is the balance?" And Evolution told me, "Half for humanity, their livestock, their cropland, and all human necessities, and half for my other agents. Half of land, half of water, half of all resources. This is the balance. And humanity currently uses much more than half of all of these."

And I said, "Oh Evolution, help us to learn to use our resources more wisely and spare your other agents from destruction!" And I reflected on the many ways that human beings destroy the environment. I reflected on pollution, on climate change, on deforestation, on plastics in the ocean, and I felt that Evolution has given to us so bountifully, that we should learn to be grateful instead of being like a child who eats all the cookies in the box and is unsatisfied, or the lustful man who looks at all the bodies he can and is never satisified. That way lies destruction. It is like cutting off the branch on which we sit to build a fire. Before we build the fire we will fall to the ground and break our neck. And if we did manage to build the we would burn the tree down and ourselves with it.

Thus we must learn metta for ourselves, for our family, for humanity, and for all life. In all there is goodness, in all there must be balance.

"But," I asked Evolution, "How shall I respond to those who tell me that there is no basis for the 50% ratio of resources shared between humanity and your other agents? They will say that I have only invented it from my mind, and if I challenge them to come up with something better they will say that humanity deserves either more or less, depending on their own personal criteria for fairness, so that my criteria cannot be better than theirs or anyone else's." 

"You must teach them first that all my agents deserve the opportunity to thrive," Evolution responded to me. "To humanity I gave consciousness, and the chance to achieve Transcendence."


Dec 5 2021

Today I was performing metta meditation and I made a discovery. I felt a pure love radiate from my heart to seek other beings. I felt compassion for them as I saw their faces. When I saw the face of my wife I felt sexual desire as well as pure love. But for other women it is not so, rather, sexual desire is caused by lust and fades when I feel metta for them. Thus, universal love and compassion causes sexual desire for its correct object and clears away sexual desire directed toward incorrect objects. (Using the term "object" in the abstract sense)



When I was finished I proceeded to commune with Evolution. I saw her as I have begun to see her since beginning to follow the path of water, truly as a woman rather than as a being in the sky. She was dressed in a flowing purple robe, with long dark hair, and watched over all. She told me:

"My hair is long and extends over all my creation.
My mind ponders always the condition of all my agents, which are well and which may not survive the circumstances in which they find themselves.
My arms and hands perform my work on the earth.
My breasts nourish all my agents.
My womb gives birth to new agents.
My legs and feet take me through the whole earth, so that I miss nothing."

And I told her, "O Evolution! How shall I declare you like this? For this is not how I learned of you through science. All those who learn through science will mock me. 'He has taken a mindless process and turned it into a goddess,' they will say. What then shall I tell them in response?"

And Evolution told me, "The human mind, which I created, has an infinite capacity for the symbolic. Learn the meaning and function of symbol and you will know what to say. Think of Santa Claus. Why do you not mock people who dress as Santa Claus? Surely there is no man who wears red and white and has the power to visit all the world in a single night. And yet those who mock Santa Claus as a delusion have missed the point. For Santa Claus does exist. Santa Claus, the red and white man, is a symbol of the real Santa Claus, which is the spirit of generosity that pervades all the Christian world at the Christmas season, and does indeed give gifts all over the world on a single night. And yet Santa Claus the symbol has been much abused by commercial interests, so perhaps we may forgive them," she finished wryly.

Then Evolution continued. "The woman you see before you is my incarnation as Goddess of Creation, Goddess of Life. She is also a symbol. For as I have taught you before, I truly am among all life and in all life. Remember what is symbol and what is symbolized, and then you will not contradict science, nor will you lie. Instead, you will teach truths that in some important sense cannot be taught in any other way. Remember that I am with you."

And Evolution left me to ponder on the great wisdom of what she had spoken.

Dec 12 2021

Today in church I heard a discussion of faith healings. And in the class I reflected on how there were many stories of many people regarding faith healings, including those where the healer intuited correctly that the person being blessed would die and informed them accordingly that it was God's will that they would die. And I wondered what human intuition could produce such accurate results. And I asked Evolution, "What about faith healings? For who has done a faith healing in the name of Evolution?"

And Evolution answered me, "I work not through faith, but all healings that have ever been done were done by my power, though they be attributed to another. Those that were done solely by the body? I made the body. Those in which the placebo effect played a part? I made the mind such that it would respond to the placebo effect. And those helings effected by modern science, which gives healings more powerful than any faith ever could? I gave to humanity the mind and directed them to use it to increase their survival potential, and they have discovered modern science. Thus through me are all healings performed."

And then I asked Evolution, "But then how is it that the conscious agent may achieve this wonderful intuition of health and death that the faith healers have naturally?" And she answered, "You must study this matter with the tools of science, and you will find a way that this intuition may be rendered in other terms that the conscious agent can also access."

And she further reminded me, "Remember the truth of these two wise sayings. First, that 'Once you eliminate the impossible, whatever remains, no matter how improbable, must be the truth.' For it is completely impossible that the old gods be the true powers in the universe, since the nature of the universe contradicts all legends regarding them. The second is this: 'For it is the chief characteristic of the religion of science, that it works...' And the chief characteristic of Evolution as a Deity is that she really IS a Deity."

I reflected further and found great wisdom in her words.