"God is dead. God remains dead. And we have killed him. How shall we comfort ourselves, the murderers of all murderers? What was holiest and mightiest of all that the world has yet owned has bled to death under our knives: who will wipe this blood off us? What water is there for us to clean ourselves? What festivals of atonement, what sacred games shall we have to invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too great for us? Must we ourselves not become gods simply to appear worthy of it?" -Nietzsche, The Gay Science.

"Religion poisons everything." - Christopher Hitchens



As science has begun to tell a story of the natural world and our existence that continually becomes both more compelling and more complete, a larger share of intellectuals have begun making statements like these. According to these people, all world religions are based primarily on falsehoods and are responsible for a good deal of the collective misery of humanity. While I think the latter proposition is difficult to prove, the former is more obvious. However, these thinkers generally go farther and paint religion as fundamentally opposed to science. Religion teaches unquestioning belief and obedience while science teaches skepticism in all things. Religion teaches that there are things that are fundamentally supernatural while science is concerned only with the natural world. But since science has adequately explained many of the "big questions," especially the question "How did humans come to exist?", religion's supernatural explanations are superfluous. I think that all of these sorts of critiques are based on a fundamental misunderstanding of what religion IS. They conflate properties that happen to be shared by world religions today with properties that are inherently necessary for something to be called a "religion." Finally, once it is understood what role religion plays in society it will be understood that religion is essential, i.e. that nothing else can really replace it. Since I argue that to be case, and also argue that all major world religions are unsatisfactory for the many reasons that various religious skeptics have pointed out, my conclusion is that we need a new world religion. I call that religion Evolutionism, and the rest of this book is devoted to describing it and arguing for its truthfulness and utility. To begin I will give my own definition of the term "religion," which I admit has no agreed-upon definition in the scholarly world.

Religion is the art of taking a story and making it yours. When I say "making it yours" I mean that it becomes yours in the most fundamental way possible; it becomes the foundation for how you see the world, or at least according to the story itself, that's what ought to happen. It is true that many adherents don't really take the narrative of their religion as the center of their life, but I think that says more about their level of religious devotion than it does about their religion per se.

More precisely, I define religion as a combination of the following things:
 - An overarching story or narrative
 - Some group of people (the members or practitioners) who interpret this narrative as explaining their place in the world
 - Values or norms derived from the narrative that serve as fundamental to the ethics of the practitioners
 - Customs, norms, or rituals by which the members are reminded of the importance of the narrative and the values it imparts

Now this definition of religion says nothing about the truth or falsity of the narrative in question (in academic circles what I refer to as a "narrative" would be called a "myth," but I'm trying to avoid the popular connotation of the word myth as false or legendary), only that it becomes the basis for how the religion's practitioners who follow the religion ought to interpret the world. It follows, then, that a religion can be based on a true narrative or a false one, and that the fact that all the world's major religions are based on false narratives is not (contrary to the claims of many religious skeptics) an indictment of the religious enterprise in general. Religion is how a narrative gets translated to culture, and how people use it to make sense of their lives and decide how to act.

Once this is understood, it becomes clear why the world's major religions are still going strong, despite the fact that many of the claims they make were proved false or implausible hundreds of years ago: the skepics and scientists who have been debunking religion haven't provided anything to take its place. \footnote{Many of these scientists and skeptics subscribe to various philosophies, especially variations of something called "secular humanism," which they claim fills the cultural void left by religion. I will discuss secular humanism later, but for now I will say that the connection between the narratives and values embraced by it are not obvious.} For how does one translate the narrative of science to human culture? To the layman the narrative of science says this: 15 billion years ago our universe exploded into being for no apparent reason. The peculiar combination of laws that govern it eventually caused the enormous fluxes of energy initially present to coalesce as matter, then as stars, then as planets, one of which somehow had the necessary ingredients to sustain life. These ingredients are a magetic field (to stop the sun from stripping away the atmosphere), water, orbit in a certain range from the sun which allows for the formation of liquid water, a lot of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorous, and certain chemical conditions that produced special molecules. Some of these special molecules like RNA, amino acids, and phospholipids somehow started reporoducing themselves and by a very long process which involved a lot of death and suffering, eventually evolved into us. Now we exist for a while and then die, and eventually the universe will increase in entropy so much that it will make the continued existence of humanity as a species impossible (unless it implodes first, which also seems likely to doom humanity to extinction). 

Where are the culture and values in this story? How do we use it to interpret the world? The obvious interpretation is that human existence is fleeting, futile, and meaningless. The failure of scientists and their allies to combat this obvious interpretation is why most of humanity still prefers to base their worldview on the whims of imaginary divinities \footnote{Of course, really religion does not boil down to pure whims and the originators of its precepts are neither divine nor imaginary. But I liked this phrase so much I had to keep it.} rather than the truth. Now there are two options. Either this obvious interpretation of the history of the universe as known to science is the authoritative one, and we need to keep lying to ourselves in order to avoid falling into despair, or else we need to radically reinterpret the way we view the scientific creation story. Evolutionism is that radical new interpretation, one which shows how our evolutionary past gave us our sense of morality and points the way forward to a better future. In fact, if we follow the evolutionary path far enough, it shows us both the meaning of transcendence and how to achieve it.

There is an important digression I should make here. Religion is generally thought of as dealing with the supernatural, and by "supernatural" what is usually meant are agents that interfere with humanity in ways we don't fully comprehend. One or more of those agents are called "God(s)" and is/are taken to possess attributes of goodness and even perfection. None of this appears in my definition of religion, and for good reason. I think that the traditional conception of God(s) is not an essential part of religion; rather, it is an essential part of the narratives that we have found most compelling up to this point. However, unlike many who see the current major religions as unsatisfactory, I have not jettisoned the concept of God. I have rather returned to an older version of God that is not very popular currently. As we shall see, Evolutionism grants to nature, and to Evolution herself, enough of the characteristics traditionally ascribed to God that it really does take nature, or rather Natural Law, as God and is therefore a pantheistic religion. Evolutionism further takes Evolution to be a sort of avatar or manifestation of God (the Law of Nature) that it is sometimes useful to anthropomorphise. It is in this sense that I referred to Evolution as "her." I like to think of Evolution as a Goddess,\footnote{The gender I assign to Evolution is a matter of preference, but it comes from the fact that creation of life is a fundamental property of both Evolution and of the Female in general.} or rather as THE Goddess who claims dominion over biological life. And one of the characteristics, or perhaps the main characteristic, that makes Evolution divine is this: that her claim over us is irresistable in the strongest sense of the word possible short of mind control. We submit to her demands, or else we pay the ultimate price--extinction.

Some philosophers in a school called "Regularism" would argue that there is no real "claim" of Evolution on humanity; rather, Evolution is a description of things that life happens to do. Whether they are correct in a metaphysical sense does not matter, because from the practical human point of view Evolution expresses a Law that we are not free to break no matter how much we might wish to. Evolution, at its core, simply expresses the tautology that "Beings that are better at survival tend to survive better," combined with the empirically true observation that "A child occasionally has traits that neither of its parents had." Until we can violate one of those two claims we are, for all practical intents and purposes, under the dominion of a law just as unyielding as if it had been handed down by Omnipotence at Mount Sinai. In the next chapter I will argue that this Law, or the will of Evolution, which I call the Prime Directive of Evolution to humanity, is much more benevolent than it seems at first, and following it leads to the highest possible moral good.

"...religions merit our attention for their sheer conceptual ambition; for changing the world in a way that few secular institutions ever have. They have managed to combine theories abou tethics  and  metaphysics  with  a  practical  involvement  in  education, fashion, politics, travel, hostelry, initiation ceremonies, publishing, art and architecture – a range of interests which puts to shame the scope of the  achievements  of  even  the  greatest  and  most influential  secular movements and individuals in history. For those interested in the spread and impact of ideas, it is hard not to be mesmerized by examples of the most successful educational and intellectual movements the planet has ever witnessed." - Religion for Atheists, p. 13

Why Evolution is God

Think of the term "God" and what it means to you. Perhaps you have the idea of a kindly bearded man who is somehow all-powerful and all good. Perhaps you have the idea of a force pervasive in the universe. But what are the fundamental things that make God really God?

If you ask me how the ancient Hebrews would answer this question, I would say first, "אֶֽהְיֶ֖ה אֲשֶׁ֣ר אֶֽהְיֶ֑ה": "I am that I am" (Exodus 3:14). That is one of the most fundamental things the Old Testament asserts about God: that he is self-existent and depends on nothing else. Everything else is, in fact, his creation. The other fundamental thing the Old Testament asserts about God is that he has put his people under a law they cannot escape from, and they break it at their peril, because it will be enforced with all his power.

We have already seen that Evolution satisfies the second of these conditions. As for the first, it is perhaps arguable that all or most natural laws depend on certain properties of our universe which could conceivably be different in other universes. And whether the Big Bang or the beginning of the universe was natural or not is perhaps an unanswerable question. But I give the following argument that it was in fact natural: Nature is the collection of things that could in principle be studied by science if we had sufficient powers of observation. We have never yet, as a species, reliably observed something supernatural. (need to think through this argument a bit better)

If the beginning of the unverse was in fact natural as I have claimed, then essentially the natural laws of our universe, or the properties thereof, which are contingent, are contingent upon other natural laws or properties of nature which are therefore more fundamental. Then the ultimate laws governing existence are Natural Laws. Combine them all into a body which you may call Natural Law. This, I assert, is God. It is self-existent, it is a lawgiver, and it has ultimate power to enforce its laws over and above the will of any being or any force. 

If you subscribe to the philosophical school of Regularism which I mentioned above, then you may take my assertion that Natural Law is God as equivalent to pantheism. If you subscribe to its competitor, Necessitarianism, which states roughly that instead of being descriptions of nature the laws of nature somehow "govern" it, then Natural Law is a subset of nature rather than equivalent to it, and you can think of God as the sum total of the "governing" part of nature.

But this section is titled "Why Evolution is God" rather than "Why Natural Law is God," so I owe a little more explanation of what I mean by this. First, let's recall another commonly-held property of God: that "he" \footnote{I use the pronoun "he" with quotation marks to denote that while I don't think of God in the masculine, most people do, even those who don't believe in "Him".} is the ultimate arbiter of moral goodness and is perfectly good. Also, "he" is supposed to have created the entire universe with humanity as its special center. Now Evolution doesn't quite possess those properties, but it is at least halfway there for each: Evolution is the ultimate arbiter of moral goodness, \footnote{I simply assert this here, but the entire next chapter is dedicated to proving this assertion and exploring the implications.} and also created all biological life including humanity. Evolution is therefore a subset of Natural Law that is especially important for humanity. In fact, Evolution, apart from showing us what moral goodness is, also provides us with our purpose in life. We have the choice of embracing that purpose or running from it (and if we choose the second alternative, we deny who we truly are).

Finally, Evolution is purposeful, or teleological. This is a philosophically controversial statement for me to make, but it's deeply related to Evolution's moral goodness and how it provides us with our own sense of purpose in life. Again, I will explain this more fully in the next chapter and the reader can then decide if they believe my argument or not.

Taken all together, Evolution possesses several attributes that are generally considered to be attributes of God and in the absence of a truly verifiable account of a being or force that more fully deserves the name, Evolution is what most deserves the title of God (at least from the point of view of humanity). In fact, Evolution seems so purposeful that I tend to personify it--keeping in mind, of course, that this is a strictly metaphorical device--as a Goddess. I think of Evolution as female because the female bears new life in an especially intimate way that the male does not, at least in most species, and Evolution is greatly concerned with generating new life forms in a similarly intimate way. So "it" becomes "her," and that is why I will use the female pronouns for Evolution for the rest of this book. The first sentence of the Creed of Evolutionism is this: "I worship Evolution, goddess of creation, goddess of life."




Addition June 2021
Intuition matters. Ritual and symbols matter. Intuition and symbols that teach us about ultimate reality are what constitutes religion. If we think we can rely on explicit knowledge only to learn about ultimate reality, we think so at our peril. Science has failed to capture religion's place as the teller of the greatest story ever told precisely because science is not set up to tell stories that convey ultimate meaning. When I feel, really feel, my place as an evolved being in the grand scope of creation, a link in the chain that stretches all the way back to a few molecules of RNA floating, newly formed from reducing chemical reactions, and stretches into the distant future where humanity becomes Transcendent, and it's so beautiful I want to weep, I'm using a completely different set of brain circuitry than I use when contemplating scientific knowledge. Science has never bothered to tell its stories in a way that activates this other brain circuitry. Science assumes explicit knowledge leads to a better understanding of the natural world than implicit knowledge. "Better" in what sense? If you mean more precise and accurate, in a way that lets us predict how the rules of the natural world work and use those predictions to our advantage, then absolutely. But if you mean "better" in the sense of helping people place themselves within the knowlegde they've received and act on that knowledge, then implicit and intuitive, i.e. RELIGIOUS, knowledge, is going to win every time. It is my opinion that the best scientists rely on intuitive knowledge or an intuitive worldview without even realizing it.



What a real religion needs to accomplish:

A real religion needs to provide a satisfactory (not outlandish) description of the human condition.
A real religion needs to give voice to and validate our unreflective beliefs about how to live a good life.
A real religion needs to discourage unrestrained sexuality (reproductive religiosity theory). 
A real religion needs to provide ways to cope with the inherent difficulties and contradictions of the human condition.
A real religion needs to provide its adherents with ways to fulfill the Prime Directive of Evolution, because an unreflective belief common to basically everyone is that fulfilling the Prime Directive is the true purpose of life.
A real religion needs to use enough metaphor and symbolism in how it describes the human condition to tap into the symbolic psychologcial circuits. This is, I believe, how religion can fulfill the first and second criteria simultaneously. The symbols connect our unreflective beliefs and desires to realities of the human condition.
Finally, and this is a contribultion unique to Evolutionism, a real religion needs to show humanity how to keep itself from going extinct and why that matters. Why it matters is easy: All your efforts to fulfill the Prime Directive will be worthless when the last human or human descendent bites the dust. How to stop it from happening is more difficult. That's what alignment is about: How to fulfill the Prime Directive for onesself while helping preserve all of humanity and keeping balance between humanity and the rest of nature. Thus the 3 spheres of beneficence, and the emphasis on Transcendence. Thus the idea that we are all "נפשות חיות", nephashot chayyot, living souls, beloved creations of Evolution. She is counting on us to achieve Transcendence. Let us not fail.